The Impact of Social Media Interactions on Public Perceptions of Anthropogenic Global Warming
        Despite the volumes of scientific support for anthropogenic global warming (abbrev. AGW), in recent years the phenomenon of climate change denial has only gained popularity (McCright et al. 77). Margaret Thatcher’s 1989 speech to the UN General Assembly was pivotal in increasing awareness of climate change in an era when its importance was not fully understood—she discussed pollution, deforestation, ozone degradation, melting polar sea ice and greenhouse gas emissions, issues which were then recent developments. Since then, the scientific consensus has become more clear, and the evidence more rigorous. Yet, those same technological advances which enabled such a degree of confidence regarding AGW also facilitated its denial, in the form of the propagation of denial over social media. One critical difference between social media and conventional media is the ease by which misinformation can be passed as fact in the former; causes include: short-length media formats which promote incomplete presentation of information and careless, indiscreet consumption thereof; lack of fact verification which catalyzes the formation of echo-chamber environments; and furthermore, the ability to abuse properties of social media platforms to mislead uninformed users. Thus, the subject of my investigation is: to what extent are peoples’ perceptions of climate change influenced by the exchange of information over today’s social media? Considering experimental data and expert opinion, it is my understanding that, for the portion of the human population which frequently engages in online interaction, the impact of opinions on AGW expressed via social media is significant on their personal views on the subject.
1. Parallels Between AGW and Religious Authority
        Edward Kessler, Founder Director of the Wolff Institute, notes the impact of the advent of social media on religious authority: “Just a couple of generations ago … the priest was not only the moral and spiritual authority … but also probably the most educated. Contrast that with today’s situation. Rarely are priests approached as figures of authority … The internet and social media are primary authorities for information, with the traditional media … a distant second” (28). Parallels can be drawn with the situation regarding AGW, which is unexpectedly similar to religious authority in that in both cases, a few experts on the subject, who were the definitive authority on said subject in the past, have now been all but replaced by online media presences. The issue with this turn of events is that, unlike the objectively knowledgeable experts, online presences do not necessarily have pertinent knowledge and, via their anonymity, are able to misrepresent or even outright lie about a topic without facing significant consequences. 
2. Augmentation of Credibility via the Multiple Source Effect
Jeffrey Harvey, Senior Scientist at the Netherlands Institute of Ecology, makes a specific example of certain internet blogs which he claims “[foment] misunderstandings of AGW causes and consequences” by “denying the impacts of AGW on polar bears” (281). Due to the cross-referencing performed between such blogs, as well as the social communities which tend to form around them, the ideas and opinions espoused by these blogs reverberate in an ideological ‘echo chamber’ formed by a network of such blogs (Harvey et al. 282). The resulting effect is an artificial augmentation of the credibility of the AGW-denying opinions they express, via the multiple source effect (Harkins and Petty 260). In contrast, interaction between AGW experts and the general public is minimal in comparison, being for the most part limited to infrequent media appearances and advocacy from world leaders such as Margaret Thatcher and Al Gore. Thus, it is completely expected for the necessarily-uninformed general populus to be disproportionately swayed by the disproportionate display of anti-AGW opinions, especially on social media platforms—these further compound the issue by being some of the most ideologically influential mediums of information transfer due to their high frequencies of use (Kessler 31-32). 
3. Conformity and Anonymity on the Internet
The social nature of the internet, especially of social media, also plays a significant role in the influence of such platforms on public opinion. The innate desire for people to conform to the norms of a group with which they are interacting results in irrational decision-making and an increased tendency to be influenced by the ideologies of the group (Jost et al. 94). Furthermore, the anonymity enjoyed by online users enables and incentivizes the advocation of radical views, especially on controversial subjects such as AGW—this effect is known as the disinhibition phenomenon (Kessler 29). The promotion of these radical opinions appeals to the subset of the populus which disapproves of certain aspects of mainstream beliefs and/or governmental stances, aspects which may not necessarily be related to AGW, via the association fallacy: for example, someone who disagrees with governmental policy regarding a completely unrelated issue (e.g. healthcare)—seeing that said government expresses concerns regarding AGW— may thus associate AGW support with their negative impression of the government and thereby become especially receptive towards contrarian sentiments.
4. Methods of Increasing Online Exposure
In addition, the structure and mechanism of various elements of online interaction can be exploited. For example, the search-results ranking algorithm of search engines such as Google take into account a multitude of factors unrelated to the credibility of website content, such as: page loading speed, mobile friendliness, and overall website quality (“The Influence of Ranking Factors in Google’s Algorithm”). Thus, organizations keen on promoting their ideologies may greatly increase their online exposure and perceived credibility by optimizing their website, regardless of the posted content (Burkhardt 22). Furthermore, paid website placement—usually at the top of the results page—is also a method of similarly increasing exposure. Regarding social media, comparable manipulation of content placement is also possible: on platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, bot programs—computer programs which autonomously post pre-programmed content—are highly prevalent (Zelfman), and can be used to propagate misinformation on a large scale (Burkhardt 23). In terms of human-produced content, sensational “clickbait” titles and cross-referencing are still powerful tools for the propagation and social validation of misinformation. In the context of the AGW debate, due to the general public’s lack of awareness regarding the underlying mechanisms of websites, such manipulation can be employed highly effectively by denialist groups to mislead viewers and attract greater attention—“there is no such thing as bad publicity.”
5. Contrarian Support Incentivized by Conflicts of Interest
Even in the case of organizations which do not engage in the aforementioned sleight of hand, there is powerful political and corporate support for contrarian views due to conflicts of interest with AGW (Dunlap and McCright 240). For example, organizations associated with the coal and oil industries have funded contrarian scientists and think tanks (245), presumably due to the burning of fossil fuels contributing significantly to global greenhouse gas emissions. Politically, conservative US politicians have been “receptive to environmental scepticism and particularly to scepticism about climate change” (248), perhaps due to a significant portion of their support comprising of the aforementioned corporate bodies, and perhaps due to their ability to capitalize on the national divide over AGW. In terms of social media, this movement translates to frequent and potent advocacy of AGW denial by high-profile organizations, most notably on Twitter which, due to their fame and authority, bring great weight to the online contrarian presence and catalyze the propagation of, and belief in, the AGW denial movement.
6. Potential Solutions
        Now, some potential solutions to the aforementioned issues: improvement of the regulation of misinformation in social media, improvement to the digital literacy of the general public, and an increase in dialogue between AGW experts and the general populace. First, the regulation of misinformation in social media, and for informational websites in general, for that matter: the implementation of stricter regulation of information limits users’ exposure to misinformation. However, the major roadblock to the implementation of such regulation involves the issue of freedom of speech. Whenever a policy effectively censors a portion of the voices present in a public discussion, the issue of freedom of speech arises. As per the UN Declaration of Human Rights, freedom of speech is a fundamental human right, and as such statements which do not cause direct harm—the vast majority of AGW-denialist statements—may not be censored without violating this right. Thus, this solution is infeasible; additionally, the solution itself is only a superficial fix regardless, as shall be discussed next.
        The underlying issue which enables the widespread propagation of AGW denialism is the lack of digital literacy—the “ability to use information and communication technologies to find, evaluate, create, and communicate information, requiring both cognitive and technical skills” (“Digital Literacy.”). Few people are able to, and/or are willing to, differentiate between legitimate sources and fabricated ones, or logically sound arguments and misleading fallacies; thus, the majority of the populace consumes all content equally without critical thinking—which is instead replaced with emotion—and thus is easily impressionable to meticulously crafted AGW-denialist misinformation. Returning to the previous solution, notice that censorship serves only as a filter to misinformation—an incomplete fix—which may also result in users becoming even more susceptible to being misled (Wineburg and McGrew). To improve public digital literacy, a good place to start is within the education system. The same skills which comprise digital literacy are highly applicable in just about every academic field, and many beyond that; this makes digital literacy highly compatible with existing curricula. Limitations to this solution include the difficulty in its implementation outside the education system, its indirect nature as a method of combating AGW denial, and the necessarily lengthy delay—due to implementation via the school system—between its implementation and its effects becoming substantial.
        For the academic world, a solution is to increase its public presence to directly combat organized circulation of misinformation. In the case of AGW, this would take the form of increased discourse between AGW experts and the public, which would increase public knowledge of climate science and help dissuade people from subscribing to AGW denialism. Basic outreach, such as public presentations (e.g. as part of the education system, at public congregations, etc.), would already be reasonably effective, simply due to the increase in public awareness. However, it is likely that such a movement would face significant pushback from AGW-denialist organizations, which have the political—and thus social—edge; thus, the effects of such direct address of the issue may be mitigated by a counterpush by ideologically-opposed groups.
7. In Conclusion
        When global warming was first proposed in the 1950s, scarce data and a thorough lack of research led to an understandably sceptical public. As research on the subject progressed, it became clear that human-caused emission of greenhouse gases was a major accelerator of the warming process. Soon, leading figures such as Margaret Thatcher brought the urgency of the situation to the forefront of politics, and led the development of renewable energy. However, in recent years, the American political climate regarding AGW has shifted significantly, and proponents of AGW denial were able to exploit the new communication medium of social media to their advantage. Now, in this most critical time, despite its shortcomings, I propose digital literacy education as the superior solution to the currently widespread denial of AGW, due to its long-term feasibility and near-guaranteed ameliorating effects. Although it does not have an immediate effect, there are few viable alternatives which do, as previously discussed. In return, however, the solving of the core issue which has acceptance of AGW denial as but a symptom, is crucial and highly valuable. Regarding AGW denial itself, it is regrettably a reality of today’s world; it would be naive to assume that a resolution for the issue as a whole is currently possible. Instead, we can, and must, do our part to create hope for a better tomorrow; quoting Prime Minister Thatcher, “We are not the lords, we are the Lord's creatures, the trustees of this planet, charged today with preserving life itself—preserving life with all its mystery and all its wonder. May we all be equal to that task.”