The Genetic Modification of Human Embryos: A Scientific Outlook
        In the modern era, humankind has taken great leaps towards improving each human’s ability to survive and thrive: the inventions of the vaccine, the antibiotic and more recently chemotherapy each cured what was once thought incurable, and each elevated medicine above anything previously imaginable. Today, the next breakthrough is already in its infancy—the genetic modification, or “editing”, of humans. Leading the revolution is the CRISPR/Cas9 technology, which enables genes, the molecular blueprint from which each person is created, to be altered. Specifically, it enables the genetic modification of humans in their embryonic (zygotic) stage, as that is the stage where an organism is particularly easily modified. The possibilities are incredible, as just about every setback we face, whether corporeal or not, may be mitigated via the alteration of our genes: our physical appearance, our hidden genetic defects, and eventually our intelligence, will all be malleable traits. Currently, most countries already have access to experimentally viable CRISPR/Cas9, and some researchers—notably He Jiankui1—have already conducted the procedure. However, the multitude of challenges surrounding gene editing should give us pause on our quest for medical nirvana; currently, the genetic modification of human embryos is only justified as a research interest. 


CRISPR as a Treatment for Genetic Diseases
One challenge is the reliability of the technology itself. In order to modify DNA, the Cas9 protein must first recognize the sequence of DNA to be modified; this process of recognition considerably limits the accuracy of the modifications (Fu et al. 822). The incorrect recognition of DNA sequences results in unintentional, or off-target, mutations, which can cause serious genetic defects should they occur in a critical location on the genome.  Roman Anton, a researcher at the University of Nürtingen-Geislingen, shows that the current CRISPR system has unresolved problems including “unintended mutations in DNA or RNA” and “unintended alterations in epigenetic function” resulting in the “hidden accumulation of non-specific mutations and off-target effects which over many generations may compromise chromosomal stability and overall structural genomic integrity.” (63) Liang et al. of Sun Yat-Sen University additionally found the modification success rate of CRISPR to be low at 25%, with all resulting embryos being mosaic. Mosaicism is a genetic makeup in which the cell has differing sets of genes, meaning that the modification was only partially successful and possibly ineffective in achieving the intended result. As such, the current unreliability of CRISPR may result in gene editing via said technology doing more harm than good as the embryo develops, and thus may result in it being unviable as a treatment.
However, already in the developmental stage is a solution to this problem: the replacement of the current DNA recognition mechanism, Cas9 protein from the bacterium S. pyogenes (abbreviated SpCas9). The CRISPR system is not limited to this protein, and is compatible with multiple others such as C2c2, Cpf1, and Cas9 protein from various other species (Murovec et al. 917). In particular, the Cpf1 protein has been shown to be superior to Cas9 in some aspects. Zetsche et al. of the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard showed that Cpf1 cuts DNA in a different way than Cas9, resulting in “[improved] precision of DNA insertions” and the “[preservation of] the seed region . . . for future editing;” Cpf1 is also smaller in size, which may facilitate its delivery to the cell (qtd. in Attar 660). Finally, Kim et al. of Seoul National University found that Cpf1 has an off-target editing rate much lower than SpCas9—1 to 12 off-target cuts for Cpf1 compared to more than 90 for SpCas9 (863)—meaning that accidental edits, the main source of concern regarding germline editing, may be reduced significantly by using Cpf1 in place of SpCas9.
The Relation of CRISPR Gene Editing to Elevated Risk of Cancer
        Another issue is the positive relationship between successful CRISPR/Cas9 modification and antioncogene (tumor-suppressor gene) inhibition. Haapaniemi et al. of the University of Helsinki demonstrated that the p53 tumor-suppressor gene causes a response which reduces the ability of Cas9 to modify DNA; thus, cells with dysfunctional p53 (i.e. those which were more likely to become cancerous) were more easily edited (927). In other words, a CRISPR-altered embryo is at a significantly higher risk of developing cancer than an unaltered embryo. This phenomenon is a cause for concern even in the case where the danger of CRISPR-induced mutations does not outweigh the benefits, a situation which can occur regarding patients with life-threatening defects; though elevated cancer risk may still be preferable to the treated defect, it is not a successful treatment result from a medical perspective. This issue is a new development, with initial reports dating from 2018; as such, there are currently no experimentally-verified solutions.
        Regardless, the CRISPR technology still has great promise as a future tool for genetic modification, most importantly as a treatment for currently-untreatable conditions, most of which have a genetic cause. 
Use of CRISPR in Plant and Animal Modification as a Precedent to Human Modification
        Although the use of CRISPR in the modification of human embryos is ambiguous, its use in various plants and animals has already yielded successful results (Rogowsky 353), as the ethical concerns associated with CRISPR’s adverse effects are limited to genetic editing of humans, and the technological limitations can be circumvented in various ways. For example, Sun et al. have edited rice plants to confer herbicide tolerance (628), and Li et al. have developed disease-model rats, which model specific diseases to facilitate research (683). In the case of the rice plants, genetically modified plants without mutations affecting the rice produced can be selected for, and thus the possible harmful mutations resulting from the use of CRISPR can be isolated from the human consumer. In the case of the disease-model rats, rats without mutations affecting the outcome of the experiment can similarly be selected for, and thus the adverse effects of CRISPR can again be averted. This selection process can be done via genome sequencing (Kim et al. 863). Of course, solutions such as this do not apply to human embryo modification, as the key difference—alongside ethical concerns—is that the goal of the modification of human embryos is the well-being of the modified human, which current CRISPR technology cannot guarantee, whereas the goal of the modification of plants and animals is either the execution of an experiment or the acquisition of a specific product (e.g. food), which CRISPR is able to guarantee.
        The first characterization of CRISPR was due to a mistake—the accidental cloning of a portion of the CRISPR DNA strand. The groundbreaking discovery of its ability to modify DNA did not occur until as late as 2012. Yet, within a matter of months, CRISPR accelerated the field of bioengineering into the public limelight. The ability to modify even the most fundamental properties of an organism, regardless of its current limitations, is extraordinary. Consequently, the opportunity for further research, the possibility of curing the incurable, eventually the questioning of what it means to be human, make CRISPR the sharpest double-edged sword of our time. Waylaid by financial interests, blinded by personal gain, we may forget our original destination; the road to hell is paved with good intentions. Thankfully, CRISPR has yet to become the all-powerful technology the doomsayers claim it to be, and will not become so for years to come. However, at the pace of current research, the clock is ticking fast; in our preparations for the age of human genetic modification, time is of the essence.