Abortion in America: A Socioeconomic Approach 
Introduction
In 1973, the Roe vs Wade central court decision was one of the first debates concerning a sensitive topic–abortion– which will become America’s first “pivotal role” (Uzquiano) in regards to abortion. This debate has become an imminent problem that women, particularly those with low income, need to contend with in the 21st century. The Roe vs Wade court case was a landmark step for abortion rights amongst women. Within this lies the question: to what extent can the US government regulate abortion in the 21st century? By striking down a Texas enactment offering to band abortion, the U.S. Supreme Court was able to legalize abortion for the first time in America effectively. Before abortion was legalized, women were compelled to take harmful and toxic drugs to perform damaging self-abortions. With this court case being approved, women were finally able to receive abortions in accordance with the law. 
The dispute on induced abortion extends back to the 19th century when Madame Restell, one of the first abortionists, challenged the jurisdictions of childbearing rights in America. (Horwitz) Her activity stirred up protests against the government, and its desire to control women and their bodies. Many women felt an obligation to fight beside her, instead of being afraid to commit the “ultimate crime against womanhood in the United States” at that time (Horwitz). The most prevailing arguments involve the perspectives of the economically challenged, and how age affects beliefs within America.


The Price of Motherhood 
        A scientist and known researcher at the University of California, Christine Dehlendorf, reveals in her collaborative research paper Disparities in Abortion Rates: A Public Health Approach that abortion rates are significantly higher amongst women of colour, and those with lower socioeconomic status. About 70% of all pregnancies among black women were unintended in America during a survey conducted in 2008, which contrasts the 42% of White women (Dehlendorf et al. 1773). As well as that, statistics found by Jennifer Denbow, an accomplished scholar with a Ph.D. working at Cal Poly, reveals that a “Hispanic child is three times more likely to be aborted than a White child” (609).
Nevertheless, 64% of pregnancies among women with an income of less than 100% of the federal poverty level (FPL) are unintended, compared to 37% of unintended pregnancies amid women with more than 200% of the FPL (Dehlendorf et al. 1773). Evidence provided by Dr. Rachel Jones, a principal research scientist at Guttmacher Institute and colleagues, report that among women ages above age 20, 13% of the total abortions come from those who have not graduated high school (232). Through challenging the expectations of costs for motherhood, Jones is able to reveal the reality amongst those with low income. 
In recent years, Michelle Oberman, who is an internationally recognized scholar on the legal and ethical perspectives of issues, documents statistics on abortion in her investigation which shows abortion rates to be “steadily [declining] across almost every category of women in the United States” but rates “have remained constant among poor women in the United States ” (667).


The Impact of a Society Under Abortion Influence
        In the 21st century, after Judge Brett Kavanaugh–a political leader with pro-life convictions–was elected into power, pro-choice women once again face trouble. Kavanaugh has left little apprehension about his views, a strong pro-life perspective with no ensured rights to an abortion. During a confirmation hearing, he labelled contraceptives as “abortion-induced drugs” in reference to religious organizations in favour of pro-life options (Martinez). His ability to win approval from pro-life supporters demonstrates his unwavering belief in the right for a fetus to be born.
This is not to say that the idea of the law, from a pro-life perspective, is entirely correct; the law is certainly supported by science and research but needless to say, pro-choice activists are still infuriated at the lack of flexibility of induced abortion laws in each state. Since American states each have their own laws, rules regarding abortion will vary between each state, which leads to Liberal states such as New York to be called the “abortion capital of America” (Lizza). With over 164,000 abortions alone, the 1970 legalization plays a heavy role in turning people’s mindsets towards one of pro-choice. 
However, in 2011, the beginning of billboards which associated abortion with genocide started to take place in New York City. These billboards claimed that the most “dangerous place for an African American is in the womb” (Denbow 603). The direct contradiction of these statements contravenes New York legalizing hospitalized abortions, which demonstrate both sides of pro-life and pro-choice.


Cost of Rejection
        Diana Foster, a Ph.D. professor in the Department of Gynecology at Princeton University, conducted an experiment with her co-workers which revealed how women responded after their doctors denied a request for an abortion, and how this plays into the socio-economic consequences of abortion. It is often questioned as to whether or not abortion is truly accustomed to everyone as there is a proven correlation between social income and poverty rates. With her results, she was able to summarize that financial struggles are the leading cause as to why women want abortions (407). Foster implicitly draws the parallel between a pregnant woman with low income and someone with health implications in need of an abortion, suggesting that both groups seek assistance which provides them with an alternative choice of comfort and financial income in exchange for a child.
Amidst abortion requests being declined, many of the mothers have a higher possibility to be in debt after 4 years, and out of a full-time job in 6 months. A useful concept with which to analyze this predicament is the reminder that although Roe vs Wade was legalized in 1970, many abortion cases are still unapproved due to many notions such as the gestation being too far in to be terminated, or errors transpiring during abortion procedures. 
With respect to education levels and race, this analysis demonstrates that families with lower income are independent victims of unintended pregnancies. Those with a lower socioeconomic status question if pro-choice is really an option for everyone, as abortions are costly and expensive. These financial concerns are backed up with statistical evidence: abortion charges average $500-$1500, based upon the length of pregnancy (Dehlendorf et al. 1776). Although it is preferable to avoid an unintended pregnancy if possible, the incongruities are clear in abortion rates for those with an economic struggle; abortion being an acceptable decision for undesired pregnancies.


Conclusion
Being supported by socioeconomic evidence, such as research done by Jones and Dehlendorf, pro-choice women are able to withhold their position and voice within America in the 21st century. Women who are impregnated but cannot afford to raise a child are the main cause of the matter at hand. Pro-life supporters challenge how expensive an abortion is and in response, most pro-choice women, specifically those of colour and below the FPL, refute by saying that the financial cost of raising a child costs more than abortion ever can. As these cases have grown massive and the opinions increasingly contrasting, the juxtaposition between the ethos of pro-life and the racialized groupings of pro-choice women creates analysis on how these perspectives are in relation to one another. The prevailing idea of pro-life has been challenged by recent developments in the 21st century, such as education concerning abortion, and the usage of more conventional contraptions to prevent against unplanned pregnancies.