An Economic Analysis Into Whether Gene Editing Should be Practiced on Human Embryos
Introduction:
Recently, He Jiankui, a scientist at Southern University of Science and Technology in Shenzhen, reportedly edited the DNA of human embryos to make them HIV-resistant in a fertilization trial, resulting in the birth of a set of twin girls, Lulu and Nana (Regalado 64-69). This controversial experiment raised an uproar in the scientific community, sparking an intense discussion about the gene editing technology CRISPR as the apparent bottom line of ethics was crossed. In response, He Jiankui defended his actions, stating that he believes that “families need this technology” and he hopes the public “will have mercy for them” (Regalado 69). While many academic articles have been published which explore the ethics of gene editing, few have focused on the economic concerns of the issue. Given the recent spotlight being  shone on this controversial subject, the question becomes evermore pressing: To what extent should gene editing be practiced on human embryos? An analysis of the economic advantages and disadvantages, taking into account perspectives such as the healthcare system, general public, and insurance companies, reveals that it is not economically advantageous for CRISPR to be practiced on embryos.
Healthcare system:
Some argue that if investments were to be made into research of genomics and the healthcare system, it could bring benefits for society. This facilitates research and data collection of CRISPR (Baumann 142). If all of this were to happen, the healthcare system could benefit, since there would be fewer diseases that they have to pay for. For instance, He Jiankui’s report on editing the genes that allowed the twins to be HIV-resistant (Regalado 64) could help mitigate the risk of  HIV transmission from mother to child during pregnancy. This would decrease financial stress on the family, as they have less to pay for treatment. Should a considerable amount of these embryos be gene edited to be resistant to HIV, the healthcare system would also benefit in the future. 
However, in opposition to these arguments, others contend that gene editing technology would likely put a greater strain on the healthcare system. According to an article written by MIT Technology Review in January 2019, CRISPR is “error-prone and can make unwanted edits,” introducing the risk of causing harmful mutations (Regalado 65). These mutations have high odds of causing unexpected diseases or side effects later on in life. This would result in an equal or greater burden for the healthcare system. A study by Junjiu Huang, a stem cell researcher at Sun Yat-Sen University, found that CRISPR is not efficient, since tested embryos had corrected and uncorrected cells in the end, a problem that he would likely have experienced in his embryos as well (Regalado 65). Therefore, regardless of the improving technology, there is a high risk of having unexpected errors in the process Due to its unpredictable nature, the efficiency of CRISPR must be questioned; it is not economically efficient to continue pouring resources into a new technology that is not working properly, considering how these resources could be invested into further development on effective procedures. Using research funding on an unreliable procedure instead of using it to find a functional treatment will strain the healthcare system, as treatable and curable diseases go underfunded.
A separate concern is whether gene editing and germline therapy will be covered by health insurance if it does become approved. Baumann argues that it will likely put an enormous strain on the public healthcare budget (Baumann 146). If germline therapy is to be covered by the healthcare system, there is a risk that the therapy will strain the public healthcare budget (Baumann 146). For example, Glybera is a type of gene therapy in Europe that has a cost of around $1 million USD (Baumann 146). If treatments like Glybera are offered in the health insurance, there will be a limited number of people who can benefit from this before the health insurance can no longer support these types of therapies.
On the other hand, if CRISPR were to be privatized, biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies would have to put time and effort into developing drugs for CRISPR, which does not have much profit to compensate for the risk and cost of this research and drug development (O’Connor and Crystal 273). There would be no public funds from the healthcare system and government, so the funding would have to come from elsewhere. Furthermore, if genes of embryos were to be edited, eliminating the possibility of diseases, the demand for healthcare for these diseases would decline. Once this privatized technology is developed, the exclusivity of gene editing may result in the creation of a two-tier health care system, leading to a decrease in the quality of the universal healthcare. As the most affluent in society turn to CRISPR as treatment, they may demand to opt out from universal healthcare. As the affluent choose to opt out, funding for universal healthcare may decline, deteriorating the system and the bare minimum care and treatment from insufficient funding. An example of this can be seen in a study by Zhang et al., where inequality was found in the distribution of health resources such as institutions, health workers, and beds in the hospitals and primary care sectors geographically with a high Gini coefficient of over 0.7 (Zhang et al. 4). In their study, the developed regions in the east of China had greater access to resources than the central and western regions included in their study (Zhang et al. 6). In addition, Zhang et al. agree that this type of two-tier system is a problem and that “consumers should be able to access different services based on their health care needs, not their ability to pay” (Zhang et al. 7). This provides support on why having resources offered to people based on their wealth can cause a two-tiered healthcare system. The system results in  having two groups of children: those who are edited out for certain diseases and those who are not. For those who are not, they will rely more on the healthcare system than those who are.
General public and CRISPR:
 A misconception about CRISPR is that, unlike other genetic therapies to date, CRISPR is actually quite cost-effective, as only a few hundred dollars is required to purchase the equipment for this procedure (Regalado 65). Supporters of CRISPR avow that with ever-improving technology, gene editing will become an economically feasible option for citizens, independent of healthcare. The ability to eliminate diseases early, like HIV, would ease the financial strain on families from having to pay for this medical care later on. Even without considering universal healthcare, gene editing could boost the economy by allowing people to save their money on medical expenses.
However, this may not necessarily happen. With regards to HIV, for instance, there are cheaper ways to treat and prevent the disease (Regalado 69). Jim Kozubek argues that the costs of genetic therapies can be expensive, and not everyone can afford it, which increases the risk of having society divided into the upper class who can afford this type of treatment and those who cannot (Kozubek). This may lead to the problem of promoting elitism and exclusivity, which could have corporations increasing the price at a steep upward rate in a capitalist society. Cathryn Donaldson, a spokesperson for American’s Health Insurance Plans, explain how because there are no generic forms of this treatment in the market, companies will charge a higher price for the branded medication, which favours the elite and upper class. Having CRISPR privatized would not benefit the general public in the end.  If CRISPR is privatized, the upper and middle class would be favoured as they have the funds to access CRISPR . The lower class people would then have to pay for their universal healthcare that is already at the bare minimum due to the two-tier system, which would pose a large economic stress on the families that already have to pay current and future expenses of the embryo. In a situation where CRISPR is used to control and edit out major diseases in the embryo stage, only those who have good financial statuses are able to access this, but those who are not as financially stable would not have the access, which may have only a portion of the population edited for this disease and not fully controlling it.
Conclusion:
He Jiankui is now under investigation by many organizations and has disappeared from the eyes of the public (Regalado 64). He believed that he could have won the Nobel Prize through his work (Regalado 67), but the public and other scientists clearly do not agree; in fact, the US National Academy of Sciences has recommended that no researcher should try this, as no country is yet ready to safely make a human who is CRISPR edited. From the economic perspective, this recommendation rings true, as it is clear that the use of CRISPR on human embryos is not ready and will not bring about benefits that can outweigh its disadvantages. The healthcare system is not ready for the economic stress that could be placed on it, and the general public is not ready for the inequality gap in society to change. Therefore, it is not economically advantageous for CRISPR to be practiced on embryos anytime soon.