A Critical Analysis of Social Media, Anonymity, and Effective Intergroup Dialogue


Introduction
In the status quo, a vast majority of the developed world are social media users. 68% of all American adults are users of Facebook, and in the younger adult demographic—18 to 24 years—71% are users of Instagram and 94% consume content on YouTube (Smith and Anderson). As social media becomes ever more ubiquitous, it is important to consider its effects in society. Dr. Edward Kessler, Founder/Director of the Woolf Institute and Fellow at St Edmund’s College, claims in his 2013 paper that while social media has the potential to foster effective interfaith dialogue, it is equally likely to further divide the subject (29, 32 - 33). Anonymity is a major factor to this separation, as it fosters deindividuation and group polarization (Kessler 29). These phenomena can lead to segregation and discrimination, as demonstrated by Martin Luther King’s experiences as an African American (31). This raises the question: to what extent does social media’s effect on anonymity impact the ability to create meaningful dialogue in the 21st century? 
While social media is a benefactor to anonymity, the consequences towards discussion are reliant on its usage, rather than it’s inherent traits (Kessler 33, 35). With this in consideration, it is important to implement a code of conduct that ensures a “genuine authorship of postings” (Kessler 30), and a trained moderator should ideally oversee group discussion and mediate conflict. In the context of a defined framework for effective intergroup dialogue, the psychological effects and social implications of anonymity negatively impact the ability to create meaningful conversation. 


The Framework of Dialogue
        According to Dr. Kessler, it is important to differentiate dialogue from communication (31) and therefore a framework is necessary for proper interpretation. Dialogue not only involves conversation but also a “genuine hearing” of other parties (Kessler 31). A framework for dialogue can be constructed using a paper from David Schoem, a professor at the University of Michigan. Intergroup dialogue is thus defined as a democratic practice involving problem-solving, engagement, and education in a series of focused, facilitated, and confidential discussions between two or more groups (216). 
        To begin, the attitude of an intergroup dialogue must be structured and directed, rather than being in a setting of therapy (Schoem 217). Participants are encouraged to reflect on their personal experiences (Schoem 217) and form arguments from their own opinions (Berg 38), but it should occur in a manner that pays attention to the structure of the argument (Schoem 217). 
Content must also be considered alongside process. High quality discussion is characterized by a tight alignment to the discussion matter (Berg 38). By simply focusing on the process, dialogues may devolve into a personality-driven conversation (Schoem 221), rather than adhering to the topic itself. Subsequently, content validity must also be ensured, as misinformation could result in harmful behaviours or damaging misunderstanding (Schoem 221). 
Effective dialogue also requires a relationship between members (Schoem 216) and is aided by a collective social identity (Schoem 221). Mutual respect between participants must also be maintained during discussion (Berg 38). Genuine relationships may be a reason the internet cannot be used directly for dialogue (218). Schoem believes that “discussions on the internet can be beneficial [...] but the trust, confidentiality, and commitment [...] are at risk” without face-to-face interaction (218). In contrary, anonymity in group situations can actually enhance attraction and cohesiveness, especially in high salience conditions (Lea et al. 769), and thus online discussion can still fulfill these requirements.
Finally, an effective discussion requires moderation from a skilled facilitator (Schoem 217). Conflicts between groups should be managed rather than avoided, and thus facilitators would introduce, control, and even escalate conflicts in a productive manner (Schoem 217). Improper moderation of conflict can lead to exhaustion and eventually violence, yet a form of “constructive, nonviolent tension [is] necessary for growth” (King 30), further exemplifying the need for proper facilitation.
With this framework in mind, it is possible to explore how anonymity through social media would affect productive discussion or dialogue.


The Psychology of Anonymity
        What effects does anonymity have on the human psyche? Kessler believes “anonymity is a key part of debilitation which harms society” (29), but in reality, anonymity has both positive and negative effects on the quality of discussion. 
One of many benefits of anonymity is its ability to focus the discussion on its topic, rather than the individuals involved (Berg 38). It also supports and favours free speech (Berg 38). Additionally, anonymous discussion encourages a greater range of perspectives, and participants in these discussions express more honest opinions (Berg 38). According to Gary T. Marx from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, anonymity is also used to facilitate the flow of information on public issues, as well as enabling objective judgement on the provided arguments (148).
Even so, an anonymous discussion may also encourage less thoughtful contributions, a lowered sense of responsibility (Kessler 29), or less pressure to create effective arguments (Berg 38). Janne Berg from the Åbo Akademi University, citing C. B. Tucey, finds that those who used their real names online were more pressured to construct strong arguments (38), and thus anonymity would create inferior arguments. Likewise, anonymity can create disinhibition—a lack of restraint and a disregard for social norms—and deindividuation—a loss of self-awareness in group scenarios (Berg 39; Kessler 29). 
Toby Robertson writes in the British Journal of Social Psychology that anonymity increases the likelihood of one conforming to a consistency norm (683). Robertson studied anonymity through the use of computer-mediated communication (689), and found that those in anonymous conditions had a greater attitude shift from the dissonance they experienced in their advocacy (694). In contrary to Berg and Kessler, participants had a greater likelihood to adhere to a primed social norm (Robertson 695) rather than contradict it. Furthermore, anonymity creates increased attraction between group members when no distinguishing cues were present (Lea et al. 761). Groups experienced a stronger social identity and greater attraction between members (Lea et al. 770), but individuals also underwent greater deindividuation (Robertson 695). 
Robertson also comments on the importance of public accountability (696), which Kessler addresses in great detail (29). Kessler finds that anonymity suspends ordinary behaviour when people no longer take responsibility for their actions (Kessler 29). Quoting Schopenhauer, he writes that the lack of accountability allows for internet aggression, calling it “the refuge for all literary and journalistic rascality” (29). By restricting anonymity on social media, it will not only “restrain the audacity of many a poisonous tongue,” but also reduce the proliferation of misinformation (Kessler 29 - 30). 
        However, in practicality, anonymity has less of an impact on the quality of dialogue than the topic being discussed (Berg 46). In Berg’s study, he finds that controversiality plays a greater influence on the quality of dialogue, with a more significant effect (Berg 47). For low controversy topics, anonymity had two main effects on the conversation: increased adherence to the discussion topic and increased positive discourse (Berg 44). However, in high controversy topics, anonymity saw little or no effect while controversy affected five variables, implicating that the discussion topic is more influential on quality than anonymity is. The affected variables saw both positive and negative impacts, demonstrating how “the effects of both anonymity and topic are rather complex and dependent on context” (Berg 47), and no factor has a direct influence on discussion.
Anonymity may be less impactful than originally perceived, but its side effects can greatly undermine effective dialogue. Martin Lea, Russell Spears, and Susan E. Watt, from the University of Manchester, the University of Cardiff, and the University of New England respectively, find that anonymity increased group cohesion. Anonymous groups experienced greater group attraction (Lea et al. 770) and greater group saliency (Robertson 694), resulting in a stronger group identity. However, anonymity also resulted in greater group polarization (Lea et al. 770), which, according to David G. Myers from Hope College and his colleague Helmut Lamm, is a phenomenon that results in a bias towards conforming ideas and restricts the acceptance of conflicting perspectives (603, 621). This “language of the mob” (Kessler 29) is a key contributor to the increasing disinhibition towards comments, and individuals online are seen to “self-select into like-minded groups” (Kessler 31), further increasing polarization. 


The Implications
        Consequently, the implications of group polarization are plentiful, demonstrated in Martin Luther King Jr’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail”. His letter primarily focuses on the depersonalization of African Americans and acts as a call to action against institutionalized racism. In the historical context, African Americans had been heavily stereotyped and discriminated against. The segregation had become so great in King’s situation, that even Caucasians who supported the African American cause were given the derogatory name “dirty nigger-lovers” and imprisoned for their beliefs (35). The same prejudice and discrimination can occur through the abuse of social media (Kessler 26), and with disinhibition and self-selection, result in less encounters with differing perspectives and opinions (Kessler 31).
A recent example of the internet’s ability to proliferate racism was the Charlottesville riot in 2017. The rally was organized by an anonymous individual with the online pseudonym “kristall.night”, and through polarizing discussion, organized the “Unite the Right” rally in Charlottesville, Virginia (Dvorak). Kristall and other like-minded individuals organized the protest on the communication platform “Discord,” where members can join chat servers, potentially self-selecting into mindset affirming servers (Flynn). Furthermore, the anonymity of Kristall provided a protective barrier against societal consequences (Dvorak), allowing her to carry out the actions that instigated the rally. However, when other participants were identified as members of the riot, they suffered severe consequences. For example, Lance Cpl. Vasillios Pistolis was evicted from the Marine Corps for his involvement in the rally and lost his military career (Dvorak). This further exemplifies the relationship between identifiability and responsibility; how anonymity removes the factor of accountability that inhibits harmful behaviours (Kessler 29; Dvorak)
        This segregation is extended by the internet’s ability to create anonymity (Kessler 32 - 33; Lea et al. 771). Deindividuation as an effect of anonymity occurs especially through social media and the internet (Kessler 29), and greater group polarization occurs in deindividuated situations, when individuals were organized into groups and made unidentifiable (Spears et al. 130). Furthermore, group polarization increases as a result of group saliency (Spears et al. 130), another factor that was stronger in an anonymous state than an identified one (Robertson 695). Moreover, individuals online are more likely to join groups of like-minded individuals (Kessler 31, 34), further reducing their exposure and acceptance of conflicting perspectives (Myers and Lamm 621). 
Subsequently, anonymity from social media and the depersonalized nature of online communication result in easier proliferation of falsified information (Kessler 30). This harms the ability to create dialogue, as factual information is a keystone to effective conversation (Schoem 221). While findings of increased group identity from discussion topic alone argues against the impersonal nature of social media (Lea et al. 771), the loss of accountability still allows for the spread of misinformation. 
        
Re-evaluation of Framework in Regards to Research
        Anonymity itself has had mixed results in affecting the quality of discussion (Berg 47). Research is conflicting on the direct effect anonymity has on public discussion and opinions; these contradicting conclusions are a reflection of  “varying degrees of empirical truth” (Marx 147).  However, considering Schoem’s proposed framework for dialogue, the implications of anonymity produce net adverse effects on dialogue.
        In regards to the principle of attention to the discussion topic, anonymity removes the personal differences and biases that cue deviation from the conversation (Lea et al. 762, 771; Berg 38; Marx 148). It is not structured or necessarily facilitated, but it does fulfill the requirement of focus. 
        Likewise, building interpersonal relationships occurs primarily in identifiable conditions, and is hindered by anonymity (Marx 149). However, group-related social attraction increases in anonymous conditions when members of the group are not visually cued (Lea et al. 770). Social attraction and group saliency suffice as an effective relationship, as dialogue functions primarily on the social identity of a group (Schoem 221). Thus, uncued anonymity increases the group saliency, and fulfills the effective relationship requirement for a high-quality discussion.
        Management of conflict is less prevalent in anonymous situations. Those who perceive themselves as unidentifiable and are part of a group tend to polarize themselves from other groups (Lea et al. 770), and individuals online especially tend to self-select into groups with self-affirming mindsets (Kessler 31). This reduces the ability to “encounter and learn from like-minded groups and [...] be exposed to other voices” (Kessler 31), counterproductive to the model for intergroup dialogue.
        Misinformation is also a potential effect of anonymity. The structure of social media and the impersonal nature of the internet allows for the easier spread of distorted information (Kessler 30), once again counterproductive to discussions. 
        Finally, the lack of a skilled facilitator removes the ability to moderate and restrict the introduction of conflict. These moderators are set in place specifically to introduce, discuss, control and escalate conflict for productive purposes (Schoem 217), and more importantly, are able to manage and contain conflict when it is not ready to be discussed (Schoem 217). The lack of a moderator, combined with other factors, such as disinhibition and group polarization, may result in a greater number of ad hominem attacks and harmful behaviours during an online discussion.


Conclusion
In short, anonymity through social media has both positive and negative effects on behaviour. However, given the loss of interpersonal relationships, the disinhibition created by social media, and the ability for the spread of misinformation, anonymity has a generally adverse effect on intergroup dialogue. James Mulvey, a Senior Enterprise Coordinator at Hootsuite, predicts that even in the coming year, social media will be growing rapidly, especially as internet adoption increases “by more than 20 percent year-over-year.” With the rapidly evolving online landscape, it is important to control the full effects of anonymity in regards to creating legitimate discussion. Genuine authorship of postings must be assigned to those participating in online dialogues, to restrict the negative effects of anonymity online (Kessler 30). Moreover, a trained moderator should exist to mediate arising conflicts on social forums (Schoem 217). In all, it is important to recognize that social media’s ability to create anonymity can be both a tool to encourage free speech as well as a disinhibitor for discussion. Neither the internet or anonymity itself is neither inherently positive or negative, and its impact “depends solely on the people who use [it]” (Kessler 33).