Introduction
        The advent of the internet has made it easier than ever to remember. Moments are remembered through photos, conversations are captured in text messages, and reminders are kept in digital calendars. But, do these digital devices have unintended consequences? Is the general public’s reliance on technology for remembering making them consequently remember less?. According to Dr. Estíbaliz Aragón-Mendizábal, an associate professor in the Department of Psychology at the Unversity of Cadiz, along with colleagues Dr. Cándida Delgado-Casas, Dr. José-I. Navarro-Guzmán, Dr. Inmaculada Menacho-Jiménez, Dr. Manuel-F. Romero-Oliva (2016), in their study comparing different note-taking styles, typed notes performed worse than handwritten notes in memory recall. Even beyond that, Bianka Patel, Grace Yook, Sarah Mislan, and Adam M. Persky, from the UNC Eschelman School of Pharmacy, in their 2019 study, revealed that individuals who know they have access to a recording of a classroom lecture were more prone to forgetting the given information quicker. Given that more and more youth are in contact with technology, especially as note-taking devices, the question arises regarding how access to digital note-taking devices affect high school students’ ability to retain information provided through auditory story-telling.
        THESIS
The Onset of Digital Notes
        Note-taking is an essential part of society; whether it be making purchases, planning activities, or studying for school, note-taking pervades all aspects of life (Piolat, Olive, & Kellogg 2004). It is a multifaceted process, appearing to involve more effort than reading or learning alone (Piolat, Olive, & Kellogg 2004). Annie Piolat, from the Centre for Research on the Psychology of Cognition, Language, and Emotion, along with colleagues Thierry Olive and Ronald T. Kellogg, investigated the abbreviation procedures, strategies, and working memory restraints involved in note-taking. They found that note-taking involved individuals selecting key points and recording it while also comprehending new information as it is provided, which was demanding on working memory. This suggests that note-taking requires more mental rigour from working memory than reading or writing does because it demands individuals to understand the material quickly in order to record it in note form. 
Digital vs Handwritten Notes
As technology has progressed, note-taking has migrated towards computers, and as a whole, electronic devices have entered “all stages of the education cycle (Sevillano-García, Quicios-García, & González-García 2016)” (Aragón-Mendizábal, Delgado-Casas, Navarro-Guzmán, Menacho-Jiménez, & Romero-Oliva 2016). However, the question still exists as to how effective digital note-taking methods are in regards to remembering and retaining information. Dr. Estíbaliz Aragón-Mendizábal, associate professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of Cadiz, along with colleagues Dr. Cándida Delgado-Casas, Dr. José-I. Navarro-Guzmán, Dr. Inmaculada Menacho-Jiménez, Dr. Manuel-F. Romero-Oliva (2016), conducted a comparative study of computer typed notes and handwritten notes. They conducted three tests, in which participants were asked to complete some tasks involving note-taking. The first task involved repetitively writing the alphabet out either on paper or on a computer in twenty seconds, utilizing surface-level processing. The second task required participants to write as many coherent sentences as possible in two minutes, which exercised more semantic memory. The third task was broken into two components: participants had to memorize a list of words and were then asked to both recall as many words as possible and recognize which words in a list belonged to the original word bank. Throughout these tests, the researchers discovered that computer writing was more effective in simpler, less memory-intensive tasks, such as writing the alphabet or producing coherent sentences. However, in memory recall, those with handwritten notes scored significantly higher, with a score of 8.71 correct words recalled (0.28 standard deviation) compared to a score of 7.22 for those with typed notes (standard deviation of 0.38). Computer written notes, while faster to create, may result in lower recall scores simply because they do not engage the memory the same way handwritten notes do: due to the ease of copying down information while typing, there is less processing, selecting relevant information, and paraphrasing that occurs during digital note-taking. Thus, typed notes may engage less with semantic memory, which detriments one’s ability to retain information.
These results are supported by a similar study conducted by Timothy J. Smoker, Carrie E. Murphy, and Alison K. Rockwell, from the University of Central Florida (2009). In a study comparing handwriting to typing, the researchers discovered that in both recall and recognition tasks, the handwritten test group had a significant increase in scores compared to the typed groups. The typing experimental group also experienced significantly more recall errors compared to the handwritten group. Smoker, Murphy, and Rockwell hypothesize that this increase in performance is a result of the additional context that handwriting provides. Individuals “remember target words more accurately when [they] take the time and effort to write them out than to type them.” However, the researchers note that their research is not conclusive; on top of the fact that the differences in the recall scores are not statistically significant (though they approach p<0.5), their research merely suggests that handwriting has a correlation with stronger memory, but it provides no analysis of the mechanisms behind such behaviours (2009).
Relying on Future Access to Information
Note-taking is a form of externalizing memory; individuals store information that they predict will become necessary in the future. On top of a difference between digital and handwritten notes, simply the knowledge that certain information will be accessible in the future may increase the rate at which individuals forget said information. In a 2019 study, Patel, Yook, Mislan, and Persky, from the UNC Eschelman School of Pharmacy, explored how the knowledge of having access to recorded lectures affected the memory of students. They found that, while there were little performance differences on the actual material in immediate and delayed recall testing, the group who knew they had access to lectures had larger effect sizes of material loss (Patel, Yook, Mislan, Persky, 2019); ie. knowing the material was available for later reference resulted in quicker forgetting of that information. They continued to hypothesize that by knowing they had future access, participants engaged in weaker encoding of the information during the lectures. Their research suggests that the idea of information being accessible in the future make individuals more quick to forget the given information, relying on its future source rather than encoding it strongly into memory.
Desirable Discomfort
        
Method
Participants
        [demographic and composition of participants] were randomly assigned either a control (no notes), conventional note-taking, or digital note-taking group. They were then presented with an audio recording of a piece of fictional literature, which was played twice. Participants were able to interact with their note-taking apparatus in any way they saw fit. Participants were also surveyed prior to testing, to gather other variables that could potentially be of interest regarding the results. 
        [initial survey information]
* preferred note-taking style
* average time spent on digital devices
* self-assessed proficiency with the english language
Apparatus
        Participants of the digital note-taking group each had access to their laptop device (which they provisioned themselves). The laptops did not have access to an internet connection. The conventional notes were taken on blank paper, with black ink. Those who took notes were given no apparatus to record information.
        Individuals had other electronic devices that could pose potential distractions stowed away and turned silent before beginning the test. 
        The piece played was [final prose fiction piece chosen for the test]. The piece and questions that accompanied were derived from an AP Literature Practice Exam sight passage multiple choice. 
Procedure
        Individuals were given 20 minutes total to hear the piece read twice. They were allowed to interact with their respective note-taking apparatus to any extent they felt comfortable, although the experimental groups were encouraged beforehand to take notes, in an attempt to discourage no note-taking.
        The participants were then given a distractor activity for fifteen minutes. During this time, they were allowed to interact with either their notes or with the activity. 
        After the distractor activity, the participants were then individually tested on the material provided. The questions were taken from the respective AP Literature Practice Exam and were delivered in the order that they were presented on the exam. The participants were given fifteen minutes to complete the multiple choice questions. Their performance was determined by their score on the questions.
Results