Climate Change and Developing Cities in the 21st Century


Introduction
        Within every major developing region of the world, urbanization and migration are vastly increasing the sizes of cities. This phenomenon and its effects are documented in Mark R. Montgomery’s article “The Urban Transformation of the Developing World,” in which he reports that the number of urban inhabitants in these nations is expected to grow to 5.26 billion people by 2050 (29). At the same time, climate change is a challenge that has “grown clearer than any other in both urgency and importance,” (21) as stated by Margaret Thatcher in her 1989 address to the United Nations General Assembly. This leads us to ask: to what extent will urban cities in developing nations be affected by climate change in the 21st century?
Answering this question requires consulting existing scientific documents, which indicate potentially disastrous outcomes for growing metropolitan regions and their occupants in the coming century (UNFCCC 3). The aforementioned consequences will directly and disproportionately impact the poorest of urban inhabitants, particularly those situated on islands or in coastal regions (Montgomery 29). Moreover, the repercussions of climate change will disrupt core economic industries in these nations if not appropriately dealt with (Hoornweg et al 6). Hence, regional plans detailing the construction of clean, sustainable cities in developing nations should be pursued with international support and assistance. As Margaret Thatcher declared in 1989, “the problem of global climate change is one that affects us all and action will only be effective if it is taken at the international level” (21).


The Scientific Consensus
        The Fourth National Climate Assessment from the U.S. Global Change Research Program predicts that by the onset of the 22nd century, global sea levels will have risen between 1.0 and 4.3 feet relative to the year 2000 (Wuebbles et al 23). Furthermore, the report states that for at least the past sixty years, human activity has been the primary cause of climate change (Wuebbles et al 14), which may lead to temperature increases of up to 5°C by 2100 relative to pre-industrial times (Wuebbles et al 15). These statements are supported by the vast majority of recent scientific findings regarding climate change and are well accepted within academia (NASA). According to a report prepared by Daniel Hoornweg and colleagues published for the World Bank in 2010, urban regions account for approximately 80% of both energy consumption and global GHG emissions (15), despite containing just over half of all the people on the planet (UN DESA). Nevertheless, despite previous theories which claimed that urban development itself contributed significantly to global warming, David Dodman—a researcher from the International Institute for Environment and Development—challenged the methodology and reasoning behind those claims in a thoroughly sourced report published in 2009. Dodman instead puts forward an analysis of previous findings which concludes that not only is there no consistent positive correlation between urbanization and GHG emissions (186), but also that within the vast majority of individual countries, urban regions had considerably lower GHG emission rates per capita than rural areas. The paper also claims that “well-planned, well-managed cities can play a central role in helping to mitigate climate change” (198) and that increasing urban density will lower the volume of GHGs outputted per capita by reducing personal transportation costs (193), demonstrating that sustainable urban development is not only desirable, but possible as well.
Nonetheless, rapid industrialization will still increase the vulnerability of urban populations to the various complications of climate change (UNFCCC 3). These include alterations in weather patterns, coastal flooding, more frequent heat waves, harsher droughts, and fiercer hurricanes (NASA). As such, it is critical to begin pursuing preventative measures such as adopting sustainable energy policies, averting urban sprawl, and improving energy efficiency, as implementing these policies earlier will lead to more cost-effective results and will assist in avoiding long-term environmental consequences (Corfee-Morlot et al 14). When considering the impact that climate change will have on the population centers of the developing world, it becomes clear that inaction is not a viable alternative to an international endeavor to combat global warming. In her speech to the UN, Margaret Thatcher announced that “we must use science to cast a light ahead, so that we can move step by step in the right direction” (24). Considering the rapid growth of urban regions around the world, continued international initiatives for the development of clean cities will be pivotal to containing the harm that global warming will cause in the coming decades.


Social Impact
        According to an article published by UN DESA, 55% of the world’s population inhabited urban regions in 2018, with this percentage expected to increase to 68% by 2050. In “The Urban Transformation of the Developing World,” Montgomery asserts that there is “no historical parallel” to the emergence of megacities in Asia and Latin America (30). His claim is backed up by demographic trends, which show the concentration of urban populations into dense metropolitan regions (Corfee-Morlot et al 9). This growth will increase the susceptibility of the most vulnerable of inhabitants living in urban regions to the various effects of climate change. In particular, low income populations that are incapable of quickly responding to natural disasters will be at risk, as outlined in a detailed report created by Jan Corfee-Morlot and colleagues as part of the OECD Environment Working Papers (9). In these regions, sprawling slums and inadequately constructed living quarters will inevitably result in structural failures when faced with storm surges, floods, and extreme winds (Hoornweg et al 10). Furthermore, numerous new diseases have emerged in recent times as a direct result of changing climate conditions, some of which are transmitted via water or insect carriers. These include Dengue virus, a mosquito-borne disease which has spread throughout the urban tropical world in response to favorable climatic conditions (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalan 112). The spread of diseases such as Dengue virus is most prominent in impoverished regions across the developing world, particularly amongst young children under the age of five (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalan 111). To combat the spread of disease in poor regions, the UN DESA advises local authorities to do their best to provide adequate access to housing, healthcare, water, and sanitary conditions for all citizens without.
In addition to the poorest segments of a developing society, the inhabitants of countless cities may be endangered by various other factors related to global warming, such as air pollution levels, exposure to urban heat islands, or geographical location (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalan 109). The frequency and severity of natural disasters such as floods and storms will increase significantly in coastal regions, directly impacting cities and populations positioned near shorelines (Montgomery 29), which will result in severe damage to infrastructure and property (Corfee-Morlot et al 19). At the same time, landlocked regions will face the threats of harsh droughts, the heat-island effect, and progressively deadlier heat waves, which may result in noticeably greater mortality rates as a result of heat exhaustion in regions without adequate access to air conditioning (Corfee-Morlot et al 19). Across the world, extreme temperatures and precipitation patterns in continental regions will result in inferior agricultural output, reduced access to water, and harsher living conditions throughout cities (Wuebbles et al 18). 
Some of the countries most affected by climate change would be SIDS, who face many of the same difficulties as other urban coastal regions. Nevertheless, SIDS must also deal with the imminent threat of sea level rise as well, which may gradually result in entire islands being submerged by 2100 (Kelman and West 3). International aid and development programs for industrializing nations that focus on sustainable growth will be critical during the coming decades, especially for the global poor and specific at-risk regions. The UNFCCC has already identified multiple initiatives that assist developing regions in creating cleaner cities, including one for endangered SIDS (25). However, although the international community is obligated to assist developing nations as much as possible, “in some areas, the action required is primarily for individual nations or groups of nations to take” (Thatcher 24).


Economic Impact
The populations within developing nations will undoubtedly be affected by climate change, as proven by both scientific projections and their connected social implications. However, there will also be notable negative economic effects, including damage to critical infrastructure and economic assets, declining revenue streams for nations reliant on tourism, and a drop in worker efficiency due to health complications (Corfee-Morlot et al 19). These consequences may result in losses worth hundreds of billions of dollars each year throughout the developing world as governments struggle to keep up with the ramifications of global climate change (Corfee-Morlot et al 19). On top of that, Hoornweg and colleagues from the World Bank noted that not only would developing countries would be burdened with approximately 75% of the economic losses resulting from climate change (4), but that even a 2°C increase in global temperature averages would result in developing African and South Asian nations to permanently lose between 4% and 5% of their GDPs (4). The text then states that the benefits of rapid economic growth and industrialization will not be enough to outweigh the damage caused by climate change, especially if said growth continues to be linked to pollution and increased GHG emissions (4). 
Nonetheless, Hoornweg et al. also stress the importance of creating an international climate deal that provides financial assistance, resources for city planning, and affordable low-carbon options to growing cities throughout the developing world (5). One such choice for an alternative energy source would be nuclear power, which Margaret Thatcher described as “the most environmentally safe form of energy” in her speech to the UN (24). Even though both nuclear energy and renewable energies emit significantly less GHGs than fossil fuels, nuclear energy will also generate high-level wastes that could remain radioactive for hundreds of thousands of years (EIA). Furthermore, an accident involving these wastes could result in the release of a substantial amount of radioactive material into the local environment (EIA). As such, Thatcher’s statement appears to be inaccurate or outdated in this context, although it is true that nuclear power plants would generate better returns on investment than any renewable power source outside of wind energy (Sims et al. 1318). Nonetheless, recent advances in technology have increased the potential viability of renewable sources such as wind or solar energy as options for developing nations (Corfee-Morlot et al 37). 
Considering the environmental and economic impacts of climate change and the direct role that GHG emissions play in global warming, a switch to either nuclear or renewable power sources would contribute significantly to avoiding catastrophic damage for poor urban populations. Corfee-Morlot et al. contend that the most effective method for the implementation of climate policy would be to work with local governments, shareholders, and urban planners to mitigate the economic consequences of climate change (3). This approach would allow for efficient climate plans that could be quickly adjusted to fit projections or requirements. A local, integrated proposal is also recommended by Hoornweg and colleagues from the World Bank, who state that such an endeavour must focus on adaptive policies and sustainability alongside urban development (11).


Conclusion
Considering the scientific, social, and economic implications of climate change’s effects on the urban cities of developing nations in the 21st century, the potential consequences will be disastrous if not properly prepared for and mitigated to the best of the international community’s capabilities. The scientific data behind the prevalence of climate change and its consequences reflect this reality, with numerous effects ranging from rising sea levels to more aggressive climate patterns (NASA). Although urban development itself may not be as significant a contributor to global warming as previously thought (Dodman 186), metropolitan regions will still be adversely affected by the outcomes. The urgency of this dilemma is amplified in select endangered regions, such as small island developing nations and poor, densely populated regions within cities (UNFCCC 3). Previously overlooked pathogens, architectural inadequacies, and urban natural disasters will cause severe complications in the coming decades, particularly amongst the most vulnerable segments of developing societies. Furthermore, the economic impacts of climate change could destabilize the economies of developing nations as once vital industries are impacted by the effects of global warming. Local clean energy initiatives, preemptive preparation for humanitarian crises, and improved urban planning could assist in lightening the effects of global warming. Nonetheless, although climate change is a dilemma that may be partially reduced by regional actions in the developing world, it is ultimately one that requires global action to avert. For this reason, the utilization of international resources will be instrumental in attenuating the effects of climate change on developing cities in the 21st century.