Are Self-Driving Cars Ready for the Road? A Social Analysis


Introduction
Numerous breakthroughs have recently been made in the fields of artificial intelligence and driverless transport, with a new generation of semi-autonomous vehicles expected to hit the market as early as 2020 (Chan). As well-resourced technology giants such as Google, Tesla, and Apple join major car companies in the race to develop fully autonomous vehicles (Amelar), the potential social benefits and drawbacks of implementing driverless cars are becoming more relevant than ever before. There are a number of notable positives to transitioning to self-driving vehicles, such as overall improved road safety and transportation efficiency. However, there are still various hurdles that must be overcome or accounted for, including the safety issues surrounding the control of vehicles by artificial intelligence systems. Furthermore, public opinion on driverless vehicles and potential shifts in the automotive and transportation industries will have massive impacts on the future of self-driving cars. Even though autonomous vehicles are not ready for public usage in their current state, the potential for a driverless future remains bright.


Safety
        With 1.35 million people dying on the roads every year because of vehicle collisions (World Health Organization 4), any development that will improve the safety of roads worldwide is welcome. One such possibility would be to remove the human factor completely, as 94% of motor vehicle accidents in the United States are directly linked to human error, according to a report by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (Singh 1). In a research study conducted at the Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, self-driving cars caused an average of 3.2 accidents every million miles, compared to U.S. national estimates of 4.2 crashes per million miles (Blanco et al.). Despite initial statistical successes for automated vehicles, a 2016 publication by RAND claimed self-driving vehicles would have to be driven for at least a few hundred million miles before significant and trustworthy results could be obtained (Kalra and Paddock). Furthermore, in an article published by the Scientific American, Peter Hancock cast doubt over the practical legitimacy of current driverless car accident statistics, citing the unpredictable nature of AI systems in uncertain situations paired with the disproportionate amount of data for self-driving cars coming exclusively from optimal conditions.
Additionally, the legal assignment of fault when crashes occur is still a controversial issue, with machine ethics playing a large part in determining whether fully autonomous vehicles will be suitable for the road in the near future. Many ethical decision-making issues remain unresolved, such as the trolley problem and its countless potential variations. In the classic trolley problem, the driver is forced to choose between crashing into multiple pedestrians through inaction or killing a previously unrelated individual instead through deliberate intervention (Holstein et al. 1). Although the logical approach may appear to be a utilitarian one at first, the optimal choice for an autonomous vehicle is rarely clear-cut, as even individuals will disagree with one another on the best course of action in certain versions of the trolley problem (Ackerman). This is especially problematic when taking into consideration the incomplete status of autonomous scanning systems, which may, for instance, have issues distinguishing between occupied bus shelters and unoccupied corn fields (Hancock). Due to the impracticality of consistently applying ethical decision making to complex and varied real-world problems involving autonomous but non-sentient vehicles, there is still much work left to do before autonomous vehicles can be considered safe for the road.


Societal Impact
        Outside of safety, autonomous vehicles will also impact our roads by profoundly improving the efficiency of roads and reducing traffic. They will also provide a new means of transportation for those unable to drive, such the visually impaired, elderly, or physically handicapped individuals (Greenblatt and Shaheen). Ridesharing and on-demand mobility have emerged as alternatives to personal transport through services such as Uber and Lyft (Greenblatt and Shaheen). These services will become increasingly common as personal vehicles will are eventually phased out in favour of autonomous swarm vehicles when the transition away from manual driving begins. The Rethink-X independent think tank expects the time required for personal transportation to decrease with the implementation of TaaS and self-driving vehicles (Arbib and Seba 8). One part of this would be the streamlining of traffic and intersections, as autonomous vehicles could communicate with one another electronically and cross intersections safely by using a slot-based system (Amelar; Tachet et al. 2).
Self-driving cars are positioned to change the dynamic of transportation in a way that will both create and take away jobs in core markets and industries. For instance, taxi drivers, chauffeurs, and truck drivers will all be at risk of being phased out in favour of self-driving cars (Holstein et al. 6), which may be favored due to being cheaper, more reliable, and safer than professional human drivers. However, this loss in employment within certain fields will be offset by improved mobility and access to jobs (Arbib and Seba 9) as well as openings for new employment opportunities in various other disciplines such as engineering, vehicle repairs, fleet management, and customer service (Lee). Additionally, the average American family will save up to $5,600 yearly in transportation costs while the national GDP of the United States may increase nearly $1 trillion by 2030 due to improved transport time and efficiency alone (Arbib and Seba 50-51).


Public Perception
Considering the potential benefits autonomous cars may bring to society, it is not surprising that most people have favorable opinions of driverless vehicles. In a survey conducted by the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, 56.3% of American drivers had an overall positive opinion of autonomous or driverless vehicles, with another 27.3% having uncertain or neutral opinions on self-driving cars (Schoettle and Sivak 7). Similarly, an international 2018 Ipsos poll showed that only 13% of participating individuals would never ride in an autonomous car and that “participants believe self-driving cars will make driving easier (69%), more comfortable (68%), and more relaxing (64%).” However, with 92.8% of drivers expressing some level of concern about driving in an automated vehicle (Schoettle, Sivak 28), it is clear that much must still be done. Even though there is substantial public support for transitioning to higher levels of intelligent vehicle awareness, 54.5% of American drivers interviewed by UMTRI in 2014 were not willing to pay extra to access the benefits of a driverless system (Schoettle and Sivak 21). This is particularly notable when taking into consideration the fact that even partially automated cars require advanced, high-performance scanners and hardware costing over $150,000 to function (Greenblatt and Shaheen). Additionally, a CARiD poll in the U.S. showed that only 25% of drivers would prefer an autonomous vehicle to a manually driven one, while that 71% of drivers would miss driving if it were no longer an option. Until the controversies surrounding autonomous vehicles are resolved or addressed and the public gains confidence in the operation of driverless cars, it is unlikely that the self-driving vehicles will overtake human operated cars in the near future.


Conclusion
        Given the concerns and unresolved controversies surrounding the implementation of driverless systems, much still needs to be done before we see a major transition away from manually driven cars. Although machine ethics and accountability are still major areas of debate for self-driving vehicles, these vehicles are generally regarded as being more efficient and less accident prone. While numerous jobs will undoubtedly be lost as we transition to an automated system, improved mobility, decreased transportation costs, and the creation of various new, high-skill jobs will play a large role in counteracting this loss. Despite the many doubts and questions on the topic of driverless vehicles that have yet to be fully addressed, the public has largely remained open to the idea of using autonomous vehicle systems. With significant support and ongoing innovations meant to address many of the aforementioned problems, it is only a matter of time before self-driving cars are ready for production and usage.