The Implementations of Genetically Modified Mosquitoes for the Purpose of Inhibiting Fatal Human Diseases - A Social/Cultural Approach 
Introduction
        In many developing countries in Central and South America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia, mosquito-borne diseases are a primary cause of sickness and death, threatening the livelihood of individuals and their communities. According to the US Center of Disease Control and Prevention, these vector-borne diseases, such as dengue fever and malaria, account for more than 700,000 deaths each year. However, to this day, there are no effective cures or vaccines available to treat or inhibit the spread of these fatal diseases (“Vector-borne Diseases”). Dr. David B. Resnik, a bioethicist at the US National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, states that conventional vector control strategies such as pesticides have significant disadvantages, posing risks to the human health as well as the health of nonhuman species (Resnik, “Ethics” 136). As a result, scientists have turned to genetically modified mosquitoes for a solution. With the introduction of the new technology, stakeholders involved in this conversation are presented with the question: to what extent should genetically modified mosquitoes be used to inhibit the spread of fatal human diseases? As genetically modified mosquitoes (GMMs) become increasingly widespread, impacted nations must consider individual and community interests, public health benefits and risks, as well as other attitudes related to the social/cultural lens. 


Genetically Modified Mosquitoes: The Oxitec Mosquitoes
        Since 2002, British Biotech Firm, Oxitec, has aimed to find a more direct and effective approach to inhibit the spread of fatal vector diseases. According to Dr. Alex M. Nading from Brown University, Oxitec has developed technology that enables humans to insert a lethal gene into the bodies of adult male Aedes aegypti mosquitoes (Nading 26). Due to this genetic alteration, their offspring will die before they reach maturity and thus, significantly reducing the mosquito population of the next generation.  However, with the invention of this new technology, nations must decide on how, when, and where it should be utilized.


Public Health Benefits and Risks 
        The implementations of GMMs can result in many health benefits and risks for humans. As stated in a study by professors at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, GMMs can simultaneously reduce the spread of the disease and its associated symptoms (Amin and Hashim 1). One example of the potential health benefits of GMMs is its possible effect on dengue fever. This virus is now a pandemic, infecting 50 to 100 million people annually and causing a death toll of around 22,000 per year. Dengue fever is prominent in rural villages in humid nations, such as Brazil. In adult humans, this virus causes symptoms such as “prolonged high fevers [and] body aches” and in more severe cases, a “potentially fatal form of internal plasma leakage”(Nading 25). This virus can also cause disabilities in children through congenital transmission. An educational video by HHMI Biointeractive reveals that Brazilian doctors have also reported numerous cases of microcephaly, a condition of children with abnormally small heads that often leads to abnormal brain development (Barrat). As a result, these affected families in rural communities look to genetically modified mosquitoes to improve the lives of their future generations. According to an article in the US National Library of Medicine, pesticides, a conventional malaria control method, can have adverse effects on both human and non-human species (Resnik, “Field Trials” 28). DDT is a controversial alternative method used to control the spread of malaria. However, due to its toxicity, DDT creates long-term negative effects on the environment, resulting in potential food contamination and detrimental side effects on animals and humans (Bouwman). Consequently, GMMs are seen by scientists and governments alike as a better alternative; one that has a less negative impact on public health. 
        In contrast, an article by the Institute for Responsible Technology argues that some citizens in infected areas consider many risks to be associated with GMMs, such as the possibility of unpredicted mutations. Other arguments include the potential environmental dangers associated with the eradication of all mosquitoes and single out the possibility of the disruption of the food chain of other species (Smith). However, these prospects are currently speculations and have not been affirmed by scientific research.
Community Views Regarding the Oxitec Mosquitoes Field Trials in Mali 
        Due to the possible risks of GMMs, communities from both developed and developing nations are skeptical of its implementation. Therefore, it is essential for this technology to gain public acceptance prior to field testings in infected nations. In a peer-reviewed article in Malaria Journal, John M. Marshall, a professor at California Institute of Technology, argues that "there is a need to engage the community and have two-way communication between researchers, policy makers and local communities”  in order to establish healthy and ethical implementations of field trials (Marshall 129). To gain insight on the community views on GMMs for the specific use of malaria control, a survey consisting of a sample of 80 individuals was conducted in both rural and urban areas of Mali, West Africa. Participants were asked questions regarding their perspectives on the social, cultural, and ethical issues raised by the field trials in their community. In the results, 62 among the 80 participants said they were in support of a release if it “satisfied their conditions”, such as proving its efficacy and safety prior to its release, 14 were opposed to the release under any circumstances, and 4 people were undecided (138). There were some concerns among the participants, namely whether this vector control strategy will work and if there is a possibility of an “[increased] malaria prevalence by releasing even more malaria-transmitting mosquitoes” (134). In conclusion, this study suggests that even though there are dissenters regarding the release of GMMs, the majority of participants surveyed are open to the strategy of GMMs for malaria control. 


Perspectives of Scientists on Potential Genetically Modified Mosquitoes Releases
Similar to some community views regarding GMMs in Mali, scientists are concerned about possible risks of GMMs, but they are primarily concerned about the unforeseen dangers involved in the releases. In a study conducted by Patricia N. Okorie, a researcher at Institute for Advanced Medical Research and Training at University of Ibadan, Nigeria, a sample of 164 scientists from different academic institutes were asked to complete a questionnaire regarding their concerns, current knowledge, and other perceptions of GMMs for the specific use of Malaria prevention. In their results, the main concern found was if “GMMs can spread in an uncontrolled way beyond their release sites” and whether they “will mate with other mosquito species to produce hybrids with unknown consequences” (Okorie). In conclusion, the study showed 66.5% of participants were in support of the release of GMMs while 15.9% were in opposition. Although 92.1% of these participants have heard about GMOs, most are not specialized in malaria control strategies and therefore, their knowledge of biotechnology may be limited. Nonetheless, with “more than 80% of participants skeptical about GMMs”, it is evident that scientists in Malaria infected areas are wary of the possibilities of this new technology.


Conclusion
        Despite the risks regarding genetically modified mosquitoes for the use of inhibiting the spread of vector-borne diseases, many communities around the world, such as the rural villages affected by dengue fever in Brazil, view the prospects of GMMs to be a promising vector-borne disease control method. However, as stated in an article by Public Library of Science, GMMs should not be viewed as  “magic bullets’’ that will automatically eradicate all vector-borne diseases, but rather as a “new and powerful [approach] with specific strengths and limitations” (Alphey and Alphey 3). If the safety and efficacy of genetically modified mosquitoes continue to develop and obtain social and cultural acceptance, the prospect of genetically modified mosquitoes as an effective control of fatal vector-borne diseases can become a reality.