Nuclear Power: A Step Towards Cleaner Energy
Introduction
According to NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, “the average global temperature on Earth has increased by 0.8 Celsius per year since 1880,” and “two-thirds of the warming has occurred since 1975”. Climate change is on the rise, and burning fossil fuels only accelerates it. An effective solution to climate change is needed quickly, and while renewable energies like solar power, wind power, and hydropower have minimal carbon emissions, they can be expensive. For example, “privatised power companies are unlikely to accept” hydropower’s “high, up front, capital investment costs” since it has “relatively low rates of return compared with gas or coal” (Sims et al. 1318). Solar power, similar to hydropower, can be expensive. It has a low market potential due to the “relatively high costs of solar collectors” (Sims et al. 1319). Contrastingly, nuclear power has “low operating costs” and the “life-cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per unit of electricity from nuclear power plants are at least two orders of magnitude lower than those from fossil fueled electricity generation” (Sims et al. 1317). Despite this, nuclear power is still a controversial topic for American citizens. The annual environmental poll conducted in 2016 by Gallup found that 44% of Americans favour nuclear energy, and 54% oppose it. In a rapidly changing social climate where increasing amounts of Americans believe that global warming is happening (Leiserowitz 3), finding a cheap and sustainable source of energy is of the utmost concern. This raises the question: to what extent should the United States use nuclear power as a source of energy? For nuclear power to be encouraged, it must benefit the economy and environment more than either coal or renewable energies, be safe, and have a secure method of nuclear waste disposal. Overall, under examination of the economic and environmental lens, as well as considering the disposal process and safety, nuclear power’s benefits outweighs its consequences by being a sustainable and cheap source of energy.
The Need for Clean Energy
        Why is clean energy so important? This urgent motivation stems from climate change. According to NASA, climate change is “a change in Earth’s climate.” Climate change is driven by the addition of GHGs to the atmosphere, and each year, three billion tonnes of carbon dioxide is emitted to the atmosphere annually (Thatcher 3). As British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said in her 1989 speech to the UN, “the main threat to our environment is more and more people, and [… ] the fossil fuels they burn” (4). According to the Canadian Government, “human-driven releases of GHG emissions […] are extremely likely to be the dominant cause of the observed warming that has occurred” and “almost 80% of GHG emissions from human sources come from the burning of fossil fuels and industrial processes.” The consequences of climate change are serious and may be irreversible (Thatcher 5). These consequences include coastal land flooding, submergence, and severe economic damage (Nicholls 1518) as a result of the increasing sea levels due to melting ice in the Antarctic (American Chemical Society). Due to these reasons, burning fossil fuels is unsustainable, and sustainable sources of energy must be found.
The Environment
For nuclear power to be considered viable, it must produce less carbon emissions than both renewable energies and fossil fuels. Coal, a primary source of electricity in the U.S., generates over 5 million times more carbon dioxide per kWh during operation. A nuclear power plant generates 66 grams of CO2 per kWh over its lifetime, which is higher than all renewables (Sovacool 2951). However, the difference in grams of CO2 per kWh between nuclear power and renewables is negligible compared to the amount generated by coal power plants. To the detriment of sustainable energies, both renewable sources of energy and nuclear power require large amounts of resources to establish infrastructure, releasing CO2 (EIA, Nuclear Power and the Environment.). In addition, nuclear power requires energy in order to mine and refine uranium ore to make reactor fuel (EIA, Nuclear Power and the Environment.), which can lead to the discharge of air pollution. Despite this however, a total 553.5 million metric tons of carbon dioxide were avoided in the US in 2016 from the use of nuclear power instead of fossil fuels (NEI). Comparing renewables with nuclear power, two independent statistical studies found associations between nuclear power and decrease in CO2 emission, but not between renewables and a decrease in CO2. The first study discovered a unidirectional negative causality running from nuclear energy consumption to CO2 emission, and no causality running from renewable energy consumption to CO2 emissions (Menyah and Wolde-Rufael 2915). The second study found that “in the long-run nuclear energy reduces emissions, with a 1% increase in nuclear energy consumption associated with a 0.477% decrease in emissions,” while “renewable energy did not contribute to reductions in emissions” (Apergis 2259). Overall, it seems that nuclear power has a stronger benefit to the environment in reduction of CO2 compared to renewable sources of energy and fossil fuels. 
The Economy
        Sustainable energy also requires economic viability. For nuclear power to be considered an advantage compared to renewables and fossil fuels, its economic benefits must outweigh that of renewable energy and fossil fuels. Nuclear power was found to create a total of 610, 000 jobs from each power plant in the U.S. and of the created jobs, 81% of the jobs are created indirectly (Kenley et al. 4899). According to a study done by Yemane Wolde-Rufael and Kojo Menyah from the London Metropolitan University, “in […] the USA, increases in nuclear energy consumption caused an increase in economic growth” (555). According to the U.S Energy Information Administration, coal domestic consumption contrasts this growth through declining exports, and are forecasted to decline further, diminishing coal’s economic advantage. Furthermore, nuclear power, among the sustainable energy sources is one of the cheaper alternatives. According to Ralph E.H Sims from the Centre for Energy Research at Massey University, wind power is the cheapest source of sustainable energy out of the five, followed by nuclear power (1317-1319). Nuclear power, while more expensive than wind power, is a low-cost sustainable alternative to fossil fuels and other renewables, which can lead to benefits to the American economy.
Safety
Arguably, one of the most important considerations of nuclear power is safety. The three most infamous nuclear power plant accidents were preventable and happened due to human error. The first was the Three Mile Island (TMI) accident, where a reactor core venting system malfunctioned, resulting in a meltdown (NRC). This accident happened due to personnel errors, design deficiencies, and component failures, yet, while the accident was devastating, health effects were minimal (NRC). According to the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), “the approximately 2 million people around TMI-2 during the accident are estimated to have received an average radiation dose of only about 1 millirem above the usual background dose” which is less than the 6 millirem exposure that a patient would receive from chest X-rays. The second accident at Chernobyl resulted from a low-power engineering test (Nohrstedt 257). A study completed by NRC Commissioner John F. Ahearne found that the staff committed several “violations of instructions and operating rules” and operators “manually disconnected” an “automatic trip safety system” because they did not want “to wait a long time before starting” up the reactor again (675). A “common element” between TMI and Chernobyl “is that the operators took a series of steps that were deliberate and that defeated the safety systems” (Ahearne 677), thus the accidents at both would have been preventable if the operators were properly trained. The third accident at Fukushima in 2011 occured because of old hardware, insufficient tsunami countermeasures and deliberate ignorance of earthquake and tsunami warnings (Nöggerath et al. 37).  When new scientific knowledge of the likelihood of a large earthquake and tsunami emerged, the warning was ignored by both the plant operator Tokyo Electric Power Company as well as government regulators (Nöggerath et al. 37). Many weaknesses at the plant lead to the disaster as well, including an insufficient sea wall and lack of an emergency power supply for cooling systems (Nöggerath et al. 42-43). In addition, emergency diesel generators should have had a much higher resistance to flooding, and the plant required separate tsunami-safe emergency systems that could provide core cooling and containment-heat removal if all other systems failed (Nöggerath et al. 43). Furthermore, upgrading these safeties would have been inexpensive and have prevented the incident (Nöggerath et al. 43). As reported by the 2012 paper from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professor Paul L. Joskow and Executive Director of the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research at MIT John E. Parsons, after Fukushima, all 104 existing operating US nuclear units were inspected and deemed safe (14) . Out of the 104, “91 were performing at the highest safety level” (Joskow and Parsons 14). A 90-day task force was designated “to identify near term lessons learned from Fukushima” and found “that the basic NRC regulatory framework is sound,” and that the events at Fukushima would have been unlikely at US plants and “could be mitigated” (Joskow and Parsons 14). This leads us to the conclusion that it is safe to continue building and using nuclear power plants, and the accidents that have happened were preventable and caused due to human errors. 
Disposal
        Reactor fuel becomes high-level waste (HLW) after being consumed in a nuclear power plant (WNA). According to the World Nuclear Association (WNA) in 2018, reprocessing allows 25-30% more energy to be extracted from the original uranium ore, as well as reducing the volume of HLW by approximately 85%.  However, the U.S. does not reprocess used fuel to recover reusable fuel (WNA). Used fuel is radioactive and can be dangerous. It remains to be the largest problem of nuclear power, and while the WNA says that their industry “has shown that nuclear wastes can be managed and disposed of safely,” other independent studies are not as confident. The WNA presents safe methods for disposal of HLW that are technically proven, but according to M. V. Ramana, a physicist at Princeton University, “there is no empirical proof” for the technical solutions, and “even theoretical safety cases for repositories contain significant uncertainties” (417). Currently, the world’s only operating deep geological repository, called the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) stores nuclear waste 600 meters below ground in New Mexico (Tracy 149). WIPP has certain long-term problems as Cameron L. Tracy, a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Geological Sciences at Stanford University describe: “we cannot be certain that future inhabitants of the area will even know that WIPP is there” (150). If a borehole breached the repository in the future, it “could release radioactivity to the environment” (Tracy et al. 150). Moreover, Tracy mentions that “complex interactions of materials must be carefully considered when predicting the repository’s performance now and in the future,” and there could be the “risk of release of radioactivity” due to these interactions (150-151). The safe disposal of nuclear waste continues to be a significant problem for the nuclear power industry. While nuclear waste continues to be stored at WIPP, it remains a short-term solution with long-term problems that need to be solved.
Conclusion
Nuclear energy continues to be a controversial topic among American citizens, and for good reason. While nuclear power plants can drastically reduce carbon emissions, bring economic benefits to the U.S, and remain a safe alternative to fossil fuels, the disposal process is severely flawed. Consumption of nuclear energy will allow us to have a 0.477% decrease in emissions for every 1% increase in usage of nuclear power. In addition, nuclear power is one of the cheapest sources of energy out of the other sustainable energy alternatives and can help us bring an increase in GDP and jobs. Nuclear power is also very safe, as long as nuclear plants are being held to the highest standards of safety. Accidents like Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima warn us of the grave consequences of negligence. The last hurdle to nuclear energy is nuclear waste disposal and while New Mexico’s Waste Isolation Pilot Plant remains a short-term solution, its long-term issues present a challenge to policymakers and scientists alike. Climate change poses as one of humanity’s greatest threats, one that requires immediate action. The two options available to the U.S. is to continue contributing to the accumulation of GHG while a long-term solution for nuclear waste disposal is found or to encourage the establishment of more nuclear power plants while generating more nuclear waste but vastly reduce carbon emissions. The recommendation given is to encourage the consumption of nuclear energy since this brings us vital environmental and economic benefits, while continuing storage of nuclear waste in WIPP as a short-term solution. As Bob Dylan warned in his famous song “Blowin’ in the Wind”, “how many times must a man turn his head and pretend that he just doesn’t see?” We can not continue ignoring climate change, and the next best step is to use nuclear energy to preserve the world.