Autonomous Cars: A Scientific Lens
Introduction
As technology has developed, autonomous cars seem ever closer to realisation.  This begs the question: to what extent should autonomous vehicles be allowed on public roads in 2019? There are many pressing concerns with autonomous cars, one of them being safety. In a survey done in July, 2014 in the U.S., U.K., and Australia by Brandon Schoettle and Michael Sivak at the University of Michigan in the Transportation Research Institute, 46.8% of respondents were very concerned about safety consequences of autonomous cars (14). 41% of respondents said that they would be watching the road even though they weren’t driving (Schoettle 18). 48.1% of respondents also either thought it was likely for autonomous cars to reduce traffic congestion, as well as 64.3% believing that it is likely there will be lower vehicle emissions and 72% believing there will be a better fuel economy (Schoettle 14). Thus, this report will examine  the impact of autonomous cars on safety, traffic congestions, and the environment as one of the three most pressing concerns and goals for autonomous cars.
Safety
        In 2018, there were 1.35 million road traffic deaths globally; road traffic is the leading cause of death for children and young adults 5-29 years of age (World Health Organization vii). One of the crucial objectives of autonomous cars is to drastically reduce this figure. The U.S. Department of Transportation reports 1.16 deaths per 100 million miles driven on U.S. roads in 2017, while leading self-driving car company Waymo has only driven 8 million total (@johnkrafcik), but they have not experienced any fatal crashes. Current autonomous cars include sensors like LiDAR, or Light Detection and Ranging, cameras, radars, audio detection systems and GPS to help guide their path. A new technology called machine learning, which is statistical technique to approximate an equation to large amounts of data through training is used in autonomous car navigation (Kuderer et al. 2646). Image recognition involved in autonomous guidance systems achieved an accuracy of 96% in one study done by Viktoria Plemakova, a student at the University of Tartu in the Institute of Computer Science, while a study done by Li Suhao at the Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, only achieved an average accuracy of 82.2% classifying vehicle types under time restraints. The authors note that this value meets “the requirements of traffic scenarios Vehicle target detection” (Li Suhao et al. 571). However, research done by PhD candidate, M. Srinivasan Ramanagopal, shows that “for a safety critical application such as autonomous driving, the error rates of the current state-of-the-art are still too high to enable safe operation” (Ramanagopal et al. 1). It seems reasonable to conclude that autonomous cars with current technology are unsafe to be publicly deployed until they meet a higher safety standard.


Impact on Traffic Congestion
        Traffic congestion is another significant problem that autonomous cars aims to solve. Autonomous cars are able to connect to other cars to exchange and process information almost instantaneously. This could perhaps improve the efficiency of traffic flow to reduce the economic cost of traffic congestion, which stood around $124 billion USD in the United States (Guerrini). Research done by S. Ilgin Guler, an assistant professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania shows that “using information from connected vehicles to better adapt the traffic signal … can significantly reduce the average delay,” almost “60% can be observed” in low demand scenarios (Guler et al. 121). However, a simulation done by the World Economic Forum and the Boston Consulting Group published in June of 2018 indicated that there would be a travel time increase of 5.5% in downtown boston, if shared autonomous vehicles were introduced, worsening congestion (World Economic Forum 4). On the contrary, in Allston, travel time is expected to decrease by 12.1% (World Economic Forum 4). Furthermore, a common phenomenon called traffic waves, which cause many serious congestions emerge “when the vehicular density exceeds a critical threshold” (Stern et al. 1). According to Stern and 13 other researchers, “AVs can revolutionize the control of traffic flow” and require only “a single autonomous vehicle” to regulate the “flow of at least 20 human-controlled vehicles around it, with substantial reductions in velocity standard deviation, excessive braking, and fuel consumption” to dissipate traffic flow (Stern et al. 13). Autonomous cars can also be used to reduce the number of automobiles on the road. Instead of parking, an autonomous car can drop its passenger off at their destination and leave to pick up another passenger, thus reducing the number of cars needed and as a result reducing traffic congestion on roads due to lower volume. This is supported by simulations completed by Joschka Bischoff and Michal Maciejewski from the Department of Transport Systems Planning and Transport Telematics, TU Berlin. They found that one autonomous taxi could replace the demand served by ten conventionally driven vehicles if a fleet of 100 000 vehicles were deployed in Berlin. The overall effect of autonomous cars on traffic congestion seems to depend on area and method of deployment.
________________


Impact on the Environment
        This paper will take into consideration the impact of carbon emissions from only the operation of autonomous vehicles, and assuming they will be fueled by traditional means, instead of using electricity. As reported by Hubert Igliński and Maciej Babiak from the Poznań University of Economics and Business and the Poznań University of Technology Institute of Combustion Engines and Transport, respectively, in their 2017 paper, “appropriately programmed AV will be able to fully take advantage of the principles of eco-driving throughout a journey, reducing fuel consumption by as much as 20%” (Hubert Igliński and Maciej Babiak 355). This is due to the fact that autonomous vehicles can be “extremely beneficial in urbanised areas” where they are “exposed to traffic congestion” (Hubert Igliński and Maciej Babiak 355). Autonomous vehicles are also forced to obey the speed limit, which “ensures the lowest fuel consumption” as well as minimizing acceleration, an “energy intensive process” (Hubert Igliński and Maciej Babiak 255). Moreover, vehicle to vehicle and vehicle to infrastructure communication promise to increase the reliability of the US transportation network (KPMG 12) to optimise use of energy via coordination of vehicles at intersections, potentially eliminating the need for traffic direction like traffic lights and stop signs (KPMG 31). Although a previous section has deemed current technology unsafe mating cto have fully autonomous cars, assuming they could meet safety standards, less safety precautions in cars can be implemented to reduce vehicle weight, thus reducing fuel consumption (KPMG 25). 
Conclusion
        While safety of autonomous vehicles seems inadequate relative to current standards, its potential impact on traffic congestion and the environment are significant enough that pursuing functional autonomous cars in the future is valuable. Benefits of more efficient traffic, less carbon emissions, and reduced spending are the potential positive impacts on the road, however autonomous cars do not seem safe enough to be used on the roads. Since safety is such a critical factor in whether autonomous cars should be used, as it puts human lives at risk, they should be restricted to roads where conditions are most ideal for autonomous cars, with the most number of safety precautions in place, like emergency operators ready to take control at any moment and low population density to decrease risk of collisions.