The Use of Germline Gene Editing for Research and Clinical Purposes: Ethical Considerations


Introduction
In the twenty-first century, numerous technological advances have signalled a new era that has blurred the lines between reality and science fiction. Even DNA, the blueprints for all living things, can be modified directly. In fact, gene editing has been around for two decades now with a broad range of applications. Moreover, with the discovery of CRISPR/Cas9 in 2014, a powerful gene-editing tool that is simpler, more efficient and more affordable than its predecessors (NAS et al. 65), scientists have made rapid advancements in the field within just a few years. There has already been remarkable research and clinical trials done with human somatic cell gene therapy. Logically, the next step would be editing the source of the individual, the germline  cells. Although the prospect of a society of modified humans, as portrayed in the dystopian movie Gattaca, seems to be a specter looming in the distant future, it is the reality of the present, as it has already happened. Chinese biophysicist He Jiankui took the scientific world by storm when he announced in November 2018 that he had created the first gene-edited babies, twin girls with the CCR5 gene reportedly disabled, reducing the risk of HIV infection (Saey, “Claim of first” 20). This experiment has garnered much criticism from the scientists and ethicists worldwide, raised multiple moral questions, and rekindled the debate over the ethicality of human germline gene-editing (GGE) that could create permanent changes affecting the entire individual and be inherited by subsequent generations. As the use of GGE will undoubtedly have significant consequences on humanity as a whole, the extent to which gene-editing in human germline cells is ethically permissible becomes a worthwhile topic to address.


The Clinical Case
Within the ongoing discussion surrounding genome editing, a clear distinction has been made between two areas of application: medical and research. Primarily, much of the controversy centers around the therapeutic implications of the technology and there are multiple perspectives that propose different courses of action. On one hand, there are those who believe that it should be banned for both ethical and moral reasons. From a religious point of view, many see genetic editing as usurping God’s role in humanity by meddling with nature. According to the Roman Catholic Church’s 2008 instruction, the Dignitas Personae, using genetic editing to modify human beings would be trying to “take the place of [mankind’s] Creator” (Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith). In other words, it would be ‘Playing God’, which is a very dangerous notion to many of the devout. Similarly, UNESCO, a specialized agency of the UN that advocates for human rights and peace, believes that the human genome—“the heritage of humanity”—is not to be tinkered with (qtd. in Mahoney and Siegal 203). 
On the other hand, human genome modification at the embryonic level can offer treatment for debilitating, rare genetic disorders. Such disorders including cystic fibrosis, Tay-Sachs disease, sickle cell anemia, and the fatal autosomal dominant Huntington’s Disease (Mahoney and Siegal 198) could be corrected, which would improve the quality of life for future generations. George Church, a professor of Genetics at Harvard Medical School who developed methods used in the first genome sequence, thinks that GGE could be the only solution for those afflicted. Similarly, some, such as retired bioethicist Ronald Green of Dartmouth College, believe “in the case of such severe diseases, we have a moral obligation to do so” (Saey, “Will Better Babies” 4-5), reflecting the sentiment that since life-changing therapeutic technology is available, withholding it would be immoral. While critics agree this medical application could be ethical, they point out the safety concerns with the current technology to justify their negative stance toward clinical use of GGE. The risk of mosaicism and off-target mutations could have unintended and potentially disastrous consequences for genetically engineered individuals who cannot consent before birth: making GGE dangerous and unethical, especially considering there are safer and already established methods such as PGD to select embryos without genetic disorders (Lanphier et al. 411).
Another cause for concern, germline modification carries underlying notions of genetic inferiority according to current social prejudices and could undermine the value of diversity among humans, thereby harming the common good. What should be considered a “condition” that needs fixing and what should not? Those in the deaf community among others, as cited by a US government agency, do not consider their conditions a disability (NIH) and worry that persons born with genetic conditions would be devalued in society or seen as unfixed ‘problems’. Likewise, critics also fear the slippery slope towards much more unacceptable uses— namely for enhancements—which would inevitably follow the implementation of therapeutic applications. Thus, ushering in an era of “positive eugenics”, genetic discrimination, and designer babies (“Scientists Concerned” 7). Consequently, the public worry the gap between the classes will widen as the rich would become biologically superior. Evidenced by a nonpartisan research center’s survey in 2018, 58% of Americans believe that it would result in increased inequality because only the wealthy would have access to it (“Public Views”). Moreover, if genetically engineered humans become commonplace—like in Gattaca — individuals will be defined by their engineered genome and genetic discrimination justified. With the fear of future misuse, a group of scientists headed by Edward Lanphier, chairman of The Alliance for Regenerative Medicine, called for a moratorium on human germline modification. All involved with research and development of more ethically accepted gene therapy using somatic cells, they are concerned that public outcry against unethical exploitations of GGE would hinder their area of work. Which, they point out would be impeding the clinical development of an approach that can treat many diseases such as HIV/AIDS, hemophilia and some forms of cancer (Lanphier et al. 410).  Nevertheless, in their scholarly peer-reviewed research paper, professors of law, Gil Siegel and Julie Mahoney, argue that the prospects of misuse cannot justify holding back a clinical application of GGE to reduce or even eradicate diseases that do not otherwise have cures. Furthermore, they point out that insisting on a clear boundary between somatic and germline editing, allowing one while banning the latter is unreasonable (204). CRISPR is an accessible gene-editing tool that exists in many labs all over the world. Therefore, it is not something that can be regulated, and efforts to constrain it will only drive it underground.
The Research Case
Other than possible clinical applications, GGE can be used in laboratories as well. As with the discussion of its clinical application, there are many perspectives on its ethicality in research. Although about 40 countries have discouraged or banned research on GGE in 2014 (NIH), new breakthroughs have begun to push the world toward the acceptance of research using gene-editing in embryos. Some countries, such as the UK and China, have allowed such research on embryos not used for reproduction. However America, as stated in the Dickey-Wicker Amendment from the 1990s (NAS et al. 80), the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institutes of Health refuse to fund any research that gene-edit human embryos, despite the potential values in such research. For example, it could address questions about human biology, improve understanding of treatments for regenerative medicine, develop means to combat genetic mutations, test potential drugs and reduce safety problems of embryonic gene-editing among others (NAS et al. 68). In contrast, those holding the belief that all life is sacred, view research on embryos morally unacceptable. In accordance to the Roman Catholic belief that life begins at conception, the Church discloses that “treating the human embryo as mere laboratory material“ would “[constitute] a crime against their dignity as human beings” (Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith). 65% of Americans echo this disapproval of experimenting on human embryos, agreeing it would be crossing ethical boundaries with medical technology (“Public Views”). Despite acknowledging the ethical concerns, groups such as the Hinxton Group, a self-organized collection of scientists and ethicists focused on stem cell research, warn against the negative impact of over-regulation on the development of valid uses of genome-editing. Similar to their other statements concerning embryonic stem cell research, the group recommends that research should proceed, albeit under strict guidelines (qtd. in Carroll and Charo). 


Towards the Future - Conclusion
Despite all the excitement surrounding the possibilities and novel applications this technology may have, it is imperative that the issue is broached with careful deliberation. What is done and decisions made today will have unprecedented impacts on the future and beyond. Thus, the extent to which gene-editing in human germline cells is permissible becomes a pressing matter to address, but one that remains without a definitive consensus.