The Bioethics of Embryonic Gene Editing: A Dilemma Regarding its Implications
Introduction: The Gene Editing Revolution
The next revolutionary scientific breakthrough is rapidly closing upon us as research in the modification of the human genome continues to advance. The progress that one gene editing system, CRISPR-Cas9, has made, has been nothing short of astounding considering the length of its brief existence. Teddy Ellison, Associate at American law firm Latham and Watkins LLP, has succinctly described CRISPR-Cas9 as a “targeted genome modification system that uses a guide RNA and the Cas9 enzyme to precisely edit a DNA sequence” (599) in his legal review on gene editing. Essentially, this gene editing system has allowed scientists to target specific genes, either to inhibit or facilitate their expression and make it conveniently accessible and economically viable for all. 
The host of potential industrial applications and the implications that this system may have for the scientific community reveals CRISPR-Cas9’s importance to mankind’s future. The ability to alter the genetic code: that which makes humans human, is a great power. Yet, along with this power comes great responsibility.  This stride in mankind’s progression is far from challenge-free: it will bring up ethical and moral questions that will test the values of our global society. Should germline gene editing to be allowed as accepted practice? Or are we inclined to ban its use? A recent development in China serves as a perfect example of this dilemma.
Context: A Controversial Breakthrough
He Jiankui’s human germline engineering clinical trial in November of 2018 signifies a notable landmark: the birth of the first genetically modified humans, says Elsie Chen and Paul Mozurthe, two reporters from the New York Times. Journalist Alice Klein and reporter Michael Le Page found that the Chinese scientist utilized CRISPR technology to remove the CCR5 gene from human embryos to attempt inhibition of possible HIV development(7). However, this breakthrough has been mired in controversy and has been generally condemned by the scientific community. Along with discussion and debate, much scrutiny fell upon the ethics of Jiankui’s experiment. 
As told by the Director of the UNC Center for Bioethics and Professor in the Department of Social Medicine, Eric Juengst, “society’s moral uncertainties about these … experiments needed to be better resolved before clinical trials … should be attempted” (15) Suspicions regarding Jiankui’s true intentions, and whether his desire for fame and prestige within the medical community corrupted a commitment to ethics, have elicited a response from the Chinese government. Chinese officials of China's National Health Commission, along with the Shenzhen City Medical Ethics Expert Board, have begun investigations (Klein and Le Page 7) regarding the details of the clinical trial and possible violations of Chinese law. 
In a paper focusing on the case of the European Union’s Sixth Framework Programme by Brian Salter of the Global Biopolitics Research Group, the development of these genomic technologies is said to lead to intense competition. The paper goes on to reveal how “a global competition … that is increasing in intensity” has driven countries towards investments in the field, demands for global life science research companies, and constant re-examination of their regulations, leading to fickle policy (283): a result of the dilemma between technological progress and ethical procedure.
Currently, there are two primary types of genetic editing being developed: somatic gene editing and germline gene editing. A paper published in the Journal of Applied Philosophy, “The Ethics of Germline Gene Editing” by bioethicists, Christopher Gyngell, Thomas Douglas and Julian Savulescu, reports that germline treatments result in the propagation of the genetic changes in future generations (498), and thus, while both deal with changes in the genome, germline editing specifically refers to the alteration of embryonic DNA (Ellison 597). Alternatively, somatic gene editing only affects the individual patient (Ellison 599). 
The differentiation between somatic and germline gene editing is important to establish, as pointed out by Professor Gerd Richter and Dr. Matthew D. Bacchetta, of Philipps-University Marburg and Cornell University Medical College respectively (306). The focus of this paper will be placed upon nuclear germline editing (Richter and Bacchetta 316), simply due to its greater controversial nature.
The Merits and Dangers of Germline Gene Editing
CRISPR technology has changed the ease of access for genetic modification, and by doing so, has opened a bioethics equivalent of Pandora’s box. According to Lisa Fenech, an Associate at Ruskin Moscou Faltischek law firm, the financial barrier has become practically non-existent, CRISPR has brought costs from “5,000 USD” down to the cost of an RNA molecule, at around “thirty dollars” (151). Further compounding this problem is the fact that, the ethical justification of artificial genome engineering, such as gene editing’s usage regarding therapy/prevention versus enhancement (Richter and Bacchetta 307), are topics that are lag significantly behind the current advances being made.
The general motivation behind germline gene editing, according to professor Gerd Richter and Dr. Matthew D. Bacchetta, of Philipps-University Marburg and Cornell University Medical College respectively, is to serve as “preventive strategies for potential diseases” (305). GGE could offer massive benefits to those particular people who have a risk of developing serious life debilitating disorders thanks to the hereditary genes of their parents’ genetic material (Richter and Bacchetta 315-316), as well as of any future progeny. This is further enhanced by current procedures, according to David A. Prentice, Vice President and Research Director for the Charlotte Lozier Institute, such as genetic counseling based on the detection of certain genetic markers (233). These potential benefits make GGE acceptable for some, as “current people have moral reasons to prevent the occurrence of disease in future people” (Gyngell et al. 499). The example of a bystander, one who could help others but chooses not to, is a representation of the unsaved lives GGE advocates hope to save. There is a moral weight placed within the choice regarding whether to treat a patient. Proponents within the United States have also referred to the fact that modern reproductive technologies are able to provide for parents, choices with similar results as CRISPR. There is belief that the lack of regulation status on reproductive technologies should also be applied to gene editing technology (Ossareh 734).
Another arising dilemma when it comes to GGE is the intention behind its development: is it for gene therapy and health care or genetic engineering and genomic advancement? Those against GGE see issues with both intentions. CRISPR technology is still new, and so its consequences “have not been determined” (Fenech 153). Complications could occur, where the DNA sequences are missed, unintentionally eliminated, misplaced, or even damaged. The nature of germline ensures these mutational defects will be pronounced in all future generations, and the birth of patient offspring could be considered immoral. Furthermore, Fenech reveals that scientists “at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston… have discovered the frequency of mutations ranges from 0.1% to over 60%.” Clearly, certain procedures should require further testing before any human trials. Additional concerns primarily focus on the introduction of designer babies to society, as genetic alteration becomes more accepted, and the possible social implications, especially upon an economic hierarchy where financial value can translate into genetic advantages.
Conclusion
CRISPR and gene editing will be crucial technologies for the future development of humanity. However, its employment is hotly contested, both on an ethical and scientific level. Even though the potential benefits mankind can reap from germline gene editing are high, the risks incurred will be just as severe; the potential of unforeseen complications in the future offspring of patients. Without substantial government presence and regulation, the research and human clinical testing of GGE should be banned. The possibility of designer babies: genetic engineering for improvement’s sake, is, in nearly all developed countries, currently unethical. Those implications carry social, financial and ethical weights that will be too great for global societies to bear.