Since the 1950s, the developing world has been moving towards urbanization, a shift driven by industrialization. Mark R. Montgomery, a professor at Stony Brook University and a population researcher, primarily credits economic development for the rapid demographic transition from primal agrarian landscapes to developing urban centers. Yet along with urbanization, issues of economic inequality within these developing countries have also arisen. 
The results of urban population growth have been variable among specific urban centers, with a wide range of outcomes having been displayed. The general trends depict that populations living in urban centers of low socioeconomic status and financial opportunity see negligible increases in their quality of life, relative to their past lives in rural communities. Lacking services available to address public health in disadvantaged communities may have “contributed significantly in the emergence and re-emergence of infectious diseases. In contrast, wealthy urban centers with large population bases would see swift improvements to quality of life, with well-designed sanitation, drinkable water, and sustainable urban planning. A study done by a group of professors from various American universities found that “urbanization and wealth were associated with lower burdens for many diseases” (Wood, McInturff, Young, Kim & Lafferty, 2017, pg. 1)
A similar theme of inequality reigns true for the impact climate change has upon society. In fact, this transformation of urban demographics and economic progression has worked to increase the progression of climate change.
The implications climate change may have for public health need to be seriously considered. Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum and Carlos Corvalán, from the World Health Organization’s Department of Public Health and Environment, and Sydney Medical School’s Faculty of Medicine, found that “the rapid economic development and the concurrent urbanization of poorer countries” (2007, pg. 109) has set the specific examination of developing countries to be extremely important. Developing countries are the most important actor, both as “an increasing contributor to the problem [of climate change]” (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalán, 2007, pg. 109), but also as the most vulnerable victim to any resulting health hazards.
Dr. EK Shuman, an infectious disease specialist, finds that “climate change is expected to have a significant impact on human health, particularly with regard to certain infectious diseases” (2011, pg. 14). Specifically, Dr. Shuman finds that the proliferation of vector-borne diseases with insect transmissions, as well as water-borne diseases are enhanced by climate change. However, the nature of climate change is “highly inequitable,” (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalán, 2007, pg. 109), simply due to the fact that the developing countries are of a poorer economic status and are more vulnerable to the changes climate change brings. A prevalent example is the dengue virus, which has seen heightened transmission rates in tropical regions of developing countries. These developing countries also have other additional compounding factors: improperly designed urban landscapes, sewage and sanitation systems, as well as the high population density. Furthermore, the fact that climate change has steadily increased temperatures year by year is indicative of more favorable environmental conditions that increase the reach of dengue virus by providing greater availability of Aedes mosquito breeding sites. With these conglomerating factors, it is unsurprising that despite socioeconomic developments in these urban centers, dengue continues to find a greater foothold in these vulnerable regions. Scientists have concerns that this trend is occurring in parallel with other infectious diseases.
        However, alternate proposals have been made, claiming that specific drivers of disease were specific to certain diseases. Setting Dengue virus as an example, temperature is seen to be a positive driving factor towards its spread. However, these conditions are variable for diseases, with some being positively and some negatively associated. This is due to “differences in disease agent thermal optima, transmission modes and host species identities,” (Wood, McInturff, Young, Kim & Lafferty, 2017, pg. 1) which are factors that will differ based upon the transmittable disease in question. Essentially, the counter argument being made is that the effect climate change has upon the environment will increase spreads of certain diseases and decrease the spreads of others. However, this counterclaim still fails to account for the possibility that general environmental trends will, in a global scope, be beneficial for disease transmissions, and furthermore does not consider that the developing urban areas in question are the most vulnerable.
Kathryn J. Bowen, a consultant to the World Health Organization and Sharon Friel, Professor of Health Equity at the ANU College of Asia and the Pacific, discuss the nature of climate change’s impacts, and find that, while “changes in climatic conditions and increases in weather variability affect human well being, safety, health and survival in many ways,” the majority of death tolls “will increase because of heatwaves… [and] the indirect effects of climate change on basic human needs” (2012, pg. 2). They find that these two alternative mechanisms will have the greatest effect on global health, not disease transmission. Similarly, university research professors, Andrew Papworth, Mark Maslin and Samuel Randalls provide further mitigation of climate change, mentioning that diseases may “spread faster within and between cities due to travel links and higher rates of person-to-person contact,” (2015, pg. 112) suggesting, again, that other compounding factors may work to paint increased transmission due to climate change in an overstated light.
Andrew Papworth, Mark Maslin and Samuel Randalls, three professors from the UCL Department of Geography, do state that there is an underlying understanding that current evidence has thus far shown that climate change will not be a catastrophic factor for public health for the next 30 years. However, they go on to further conclude that, “positioning [climate change] as the greatest threat – instead of other important factors such as poverty and health inequalities – could obscure the potential of current global health measures and reduce focus on other health risks such as non-communicable diseases and HIV/AIDS” (2015, pg. 413). 
For the Future
Certain recommendations have been brought up in studies that could help to mitigate transmission increases. Some researchers from the Dornsife School of Public Health believe that greenhouse gas emission reduction, and consequently the slowing of climate change, would be a policy that would directly address the root of the problem. They propose governments to accelerate “away from fossil fuel combustion [and] toward renewable and non carbon sources” (Fagliano and Roux, 2018, pg. 1). Additional mentions on dietary and production system changes that could contribute to slowing climate change development were also provided. However, this long-term recommendation would not be robust enough on its own to prevent or mitigate current impacts. 
Other recommendations involve frameworks; however, a major problem stands in the way: the lack of full, extensive academic research. There is a need for further studies on the empirical data measurements on climate influences in transmission processes, characterization of demographic factors, as well as the “development of spatially structured models” (Santos-Vega, Martinez & Pascual, 2016, pg. 51) simulating urban environments. 
The impacts of climate change upon disease transmission for particular vulnerable populations in the urban areas of developing countries will only get more prevalent as climate change continues to advance in its severity. As inequality grows across the world, it is important that further research into the nature of the problem at hand is undertaken to ensure that government policy can be led in the correct direction and that global health be protected in an equal and empathetic manner.